Powdered infant formula can be contaminated with Cronobacter sakazakii which can cause severe illnesses in infants. Synbiotics could act as an alternative control measure for C. sakazakii contamination in PIF and within the infant gut but synbiotics have not been well studied for their ability to inhibit C. sakazakii. This thesis demonstrated that a potential synbiotic consisting of  LAB strains and Vivinal GOS can inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii in an infant SHIME possibly through the production of antimicrobial metabolites like acetate increasing species diversity within the system to compete for nutrients or a combination of mechanisms. Our results also revealed that the relative abundance of Bifidobacterium was negatively correlated with Cronobacter in the control SHIME . This study suggests that C. sakazakii could be inhibited by the native gut microbiota but inhibition can be accelerated by a potential synbiotic treatment. 
 
 
 

 Chapter   Literature Review 
. Introduction 
Cronobacter sakazakii has been implicated in the development of neonatal infections including necrotizing enterocolitis  bacteremia and meningitis with mortality rates ranging from  for premature  and/or lowbirthweight infants   a) and survivors of C. sakazakii infection may develop chronic sequelae such as neurological impairments . Powdered infant formula  is a common source of C. sakazakii infection but the pathogen can be found in hospitals homes and equipment e.g. enteral feeding tubes and baby bottles . C. sakazakii contamination rates of  and  from PIF or PIF processing plants respectively have been found . Recommendations from the World Health Organization  to minimize contamination of PIF such as using water at a temperature of  °C to rehydrate PIF or exclusively breastfeeding infants up to  months old  has not been shown to eliminate the risk of C. sakazakii infection as outbreaks continue to occur so other preventative strategies are needed.  
The infant gut microbiota matures in the first  years of life and its composition is affected by many factors including the childbirth delivery method infant diet gestational age maternal diet environment and genetics . The infant gut microbiota hosts a few key genera associated with a healthy gut such as Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus that dominate the gut microbiota of year old breastfed infants . PIF poses a greater risk of C. sakazakii infection in infants and cannot establish a healthy gut microbiota as compared to breastfed infants . Breast milk is estimated to contribute approximately  of the infant gut microbiota in an infant’s first  months of life and contains human milk oligosaccharides  that promote a healthy and diverse infant gut microbiota . The combination of a diverse gut microbiota and HMOs reduces the risk of illness in infants until the maturation of their gut microbiota occurs following the ingestion of solid foods . PIF may be supplemented with probiotics prebiotics or a combination of both to partially simulate the complex composition of human breast milk  which is a complicated task due to the diverse microbiota and oligosaccharides present. However there is ongoing research to achieve an ideal cocktail of probiotics and prebiotics that mimics breast milk. 
Probiotics have a long history of research and usage with early recognition and guidance being given by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization  in /  and have demonstrated their ability to inhibit pathogens through direct or indirect antagonism . Probiotics produce organic acids such as lactic acid and acetic acid hydrogen peroxide  and bacteriocins that can inhibit foodborne pathogens such as Listeria monocytogenes Escherichia coli and Salmonella spp. . Furthermore probiotic strains can release metabolites into the growth medium collectively referred to as postbiotics that could play a role in conferring beneficial effects on the host . Prebiotics on the other hand are predominantly oligosaccharides that contain at least  monomeric units and are neither digested nor absorbed in the small intestine . Shortchain fatty acids  for example butyrate acetate and propionate are produced primarily in the colon by the gut microbiota that metabolizes prebiotics and are considered to be a subcategory of organic acids . Acetate and propionate are mainly produced by the Bacteroidetes phyla while the Firmicute phyla mostly produce butyrate. Bifidobacteria and lactic acid bacteria for example can ferment carbohydrates to produce acetate and lactate . However other members of the gut microbiota can act as secondary fermenters to produce other SCFA . SCFAs play an important role in host health by regulating metabolic activities the immune system gut epithelial integrity and by exhibiting antimicrobial properties . Probiotics and prebiotics have been used to modulate a naïve gut microbiota but synbiotics have been recommended as an alternative approach to capitalize on their synergism. The concept of synbiotics was introduced by Gibson and Roberfroid  as a mixture of probiotics and prebiotics that improve the survival and colonization of beneficial microbes in the gastrointestinal  tract by selectively stimulating growth and/or activation of health promoting bacteria and subsequently improving host health. The synergistic effect of prebiotics and probiotics can be found naturally e.g. breast milk contains prebiotic oligosaccharides and beneficial bacteria that help to stimulate the development of a healthy infant gut .  
Mammalian cell lines are typically used to study the interactions between pathogens probiotics and prebiotics although synbiotics have rarely been studied in this medium . While useful to visualize the effects of pathogens or probiotics on live cells cell lines do not closely represent the complex interaction that occurs within the human intestinal environment. Studies on bacterial pathogenesis in vivo using animal models can be challenging to conduct due to ethical cost and infrastructure issues. Differences between the animal and human gut have led to the emergence of various in vitro gut models for example the Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem  that provides an opportunity to analyze pathogenhost and pathogengut microbiota interactions in more detail . While the antimicrobial and gutenhancing properties of probiotics and prebiotics have been frequently studied  there is a lack of understanding on the role and advantages of synbiotics. Furthermore the effects of prebiotics and synbiotics on pathogenic Cronobacter spp. have not been studied and as compared to other enteropathogens there are few studies regarding the efficacy of probiotics to reduce Cronobacter . 
. Cronobacter species 
.. Taxonomy and identification of Cronobacter species 
Cronobacter spp. formerly known as Enterobacter sakazakii are Gramnegative rod shaped motile opportunistic pathogens initially associated with debilitating infections in infants . The designated name of Enterobacter sakazakii encompassed all the members of the Cronobacter genus up until  due to limited genomic knowledge  and E. sakazakii was split into  biogroups based on phenotype . Eventually multilocus sequence typing  was used to further characterize and differentiate different species of Cronobacter .  
.. Cronobacter clinical relevance and sources 
Cronobacter spp. are grouped based on their clinical relevance. Cronobacter spp. in Group  consist of C. sakazakii and C. malonaticus which are the major clinically relevant species in all age groups . Group  consists of C. turicensis and C. universalis which are rarely reported although C. turicensis has been isolated from infants  which indicates that it may be clinically relevant. The other Cronobacter spp. including 
C. dublinensis C. muytjensii and C. condimenti are unlikely but possible to cause infection . Among the  Cronobacter spp. C. sakazakii is the predominant species causing human illness . Based on MLST sequence type profile   and ST strains of C. sakazakii are most often isolated from PIF and hospitalized patients . C. malonaticus was initially classified as a subspecies of C. sakazakii due to their genetic similarities but has since been differentiated from C. sakazakii due to the presence of unique genes required for malonate metabolism . More recently like C. sakazakii C. malonaticus was found to cause infection in infants by invading and damaging human gut epithelial cells . However C. sakazakii has the most open reading frames as compared to other Cronobacter spp. potentially indicating a higher probability for C. sakazakii to encode proteins relevant to stress resistance or pathogenicity .  
C. sakazakii is ubiquitous and has been isolated from a wide variety of sources including dried herbs and spices soil starches milk products and expressed breast milk . However C. sakazakii can be found in PIF factories hospitals and homes . PIF may be contaminated with C. sakazakii due to poor hygiene in the PIF production facilities and processes such as improper filtration in the spray drying process . However C. sakazakii has been found in hospital air dust and within the human body so careful handling of PIF may not eliminate the risk of infection .  Recently the genome sequences of C. sakazakii strains have been obtained from various food products some of which are lowmoisture foods of plant origin such as grains carrots and mushrooms . Elkhawaga et al.  found that approximately  of the herbs they tested were contaminated with C. sakazakii which implies a potentially higher risk of C. sakazakii illness occurring in parts of the world where the use of alternative medicine relies on natural ingredients derived from herbs and other plant products especially tea leaves licorice anise allspice and oregano . 
.. Epidemiology of Cronobacter sakazakii  
Outbreaks of C. sakazakii are infrequent and most are associated with infants . In the U.S. the incidence rate of Cronobacter spp. for adults ? years old and  years old is . cases  and . cases respectively as compared to the . cases for infants < year old  however infections in healthy adults often occur with mild symptoms . As C. sakazakii is widespread sources of contamination can vary and reservoirs are unclear. In one outbreak involving high school students for example C. sakazakii was isolated from leftover cafeteria food and resulted in acute gastroenteritis in  individuals . Overall the sources of C. sakazakii infection in adults and the elderly are unclear as the foodborne pathogen can be found in a wide range of environmental sources including plant and animalderived foods sewer water and dust .   
PIF is a major source of C. sakazakii infection for infants  because heatsensitive ingredients  are added after milk sterilization and contamination may occur from the manufacturing environment . Once contaminated PIF is packaged C. sakazakii can remain viable for up to  years . Furthermore using water of < °C to rehydrate PIF might exacerbate the likelihood of contamination . Improper handling and/or lack of awareness on how to properly reconstitute PIF can contribute to survival or contamination of PIF with C. sakazakii. It is recommended that reconstituted PIF be used within  h of preparation and be discarded if it is not finished within a single feeding .  
Infants especially those that are < months old of lowbirthweight  and/or born prematurely  are the main age group associated with C. sakazakii outbreaks . Young children up to  years of age and lowbirthweight or premature infants may be afflicted with dysbiosis  which is described as an imbalanced gut microbiota that has been associated with a range of illnesses including Crohn’s disease irritable bowel syndrome and colitis . Infants born via Csection may have diminished transmission from mothertoinfant of key birth canal microorganisms such as Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium  which could increase the infant’s risk of infection caused by pathogens in food and the environment . Similarly formulafed infants can exhibit delayed establishment of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus spp. in the gut thereby increasing the potential risk of colonization by opportunistic pathogens .  
 	In the early s FAO and WHO collaborated on a risk assessment for the microbiological safety of PIF. Salmonella and Cronobacter spp. were classified as Category A pathogens to indicate a clear evidence of causality in PIF contamination . Category B pathogens including Escherichia Klebsiella and Citrobacter genera indicated plausibility of contamination while Category C pathogens such as Clostridium Staphylococcus and Listeria genera were not implicated . A risk assessment model for C. sakazakii in PIF was created to quantify the specific risks of C. sakazakii to infants . The 
FAO/WHO model for determining potential PIF risk in a specific situation considered the initial C. sakazakii population in addition to reconstitution temperature handling methods and feeding period. 
.. Pathogenesis of Cronobacter sakazakii 
The combination of an underdeveloped immune system and an immature intestinal epithelial barrier has been shown to predispose some infants to colonization and infection of pathogens . In fact the infection and subsequent development of necrotizing enterocolitis  a disease that develops when the tissue in the inner lining of the small or large intestine becomes damaged inflamed and necrosised has been linked to the colonization of an infant’s immature gut by C. sakazakii . C. sakazakii can not only suppress the maturation of dendritic cells  but is also able to enter DDC to survive and spread thus avoiding the immune system . Macrophages and neutrophils have been found to play an important role in eliminating C. sakazakii by regulating the production of DDC but provide an ineffective immune response due to the intracellular nature of C. sakazakii infection . NEC can develop due to the proinflammatory cytokines released during infection which stimulates production of nitric oxide synthase and damages intestinal mucosa through nitric oxide  . Further disruption of the intestinal layers may allow C. sakazakii to reach the brain and/or bloodstream which can cause meningitis or sepsis respectively.  
.. Virulence factors 
Hfq also known as Host Factor  is a regulatory protein involved in the pathogenesis communication and survival of several foodborne pathogens including L. monocytogenes E. coli and Salmonella Typhimurium . The hfq gene in C. sakazakii was reported to regulate virulence genes and its absence reduced the infection rate in 
Caco cells survival in macrophagelike cells and oxidative stress resistance . During desiccation and acid stress conditions C. sakazakii has been shown to have an increased expression i.e. by  and logs respectively of hfq . However as C. sakazakii entered a viable but nonculturable  state after desiccation or acid stress conditions the expression of hfq decreased by approximately log 
.  
Outer membrane proteins  play a significant role in the virulence of C. sakazakii. Two OMPs OmpA and OmpX were found to be essential for C. sakazakii adherence and invasion of intestinal cells . OmpA has also been reported to play a role in facilitating C. sakazakii invasion of the bloodbrain barrier . On the other hand C. sakazakii mutants that do not contain ompA or ompX had significantly reduced invasion and adherence rates as compared to the wildtype strains . The OmpA was also identified as a key protein mediating cell adhesion to fibronectin a glycoprotein on the extracellular matrix of eukaryotic tissue . It has also been recently discovered that the OMP NlpD may play a role in the survival of C. sakazakii in macrophages which can impact its virulence within the host .  
The enterotoxins and endotoxins from C. sakazakii remain functional during the manufacturing and shelf life of PIF which may play a role in the pathogenesis of C. sakazakii infection . C. sakazakii enterotoxins may be similar in function to a lipopolysaccharide by stimulating an inflammatory response in the host which can lead to NEC  whereas their endotoxins may be able to help translocate the pathogen across the intestinal and bloodbrain barriers to cause bacteremia and meningitis . C. sakazakii has many genes related to survival and virulence but the function of some of them is still under investigation . 
Sialic acid is found in breast milk PIF intestinal mucin as well as the human brain as it is a bioactive compound needed for brain development . Whole genome sequencing revealed that within the Cronobacter genus C. sakazakii is the only species that can use sialic acid as a carbon source as it possesses the nanAKTR gene cluster . The ability of C. sakazakii to metabolize sialic acid may be a factor in PIF survival and infection of the intestines and brain but further research is required to validate this hypothesis . 
Bacterial capsular polysaccharides are attached to the outer membrane of Gramnegative bacteria and play a role in stress response and as virulence factors . The capsules of pathogenic Cronobacter spp. including C. sakazakii and C. malonaticus may be associated with infections in infants as they can contain a Kantigen that has been proposed to be an important virulence trait . Certain capsular profiles have been associated with the C. sakazakii CC and ST strains and their ability to metabolize sialic acid has been hypothesized to be a virulence factor  but further research is needed to validate this hypothesis. Additionally these capsular structures can help in desiccation resistance and biofilm formation in hospitals and homes  which can contribute to their ubiquity in the environment and pathogenicity in infants. However there is very limited research in the mechanistic role of C. sakazakii capsules.    
.. Stress adaptation 
C. sakazakii is a resilient enteropathogen capable of surviving desiccation heat and low pH encountered during food manufacturing processes and in the human GI tract . In addition its resistance against components in the GI tract including stomach acid and bile liquids may be a key factor in the development of illnesses across all age groups especially in infants due to their lower stomach acidity.  
C. sakazakii was shown to survive desiccation by accumulating electrolytes to increase osmotic pressure inside the cell which prevents cellular fluids from leaking out  but there are other biochemical pathways that play a role in desiccation resistance. For example upregulation of ompW can contribute to the survival of C. sakazakii in dry conditions while promoting biofilm formation . Bai et al.  reported that the concentration of trehalose increased inside C. sakazakii cells experiencing desiccation tolerance and found that the accumulation of trehalose also improved the survival of C. sakazakii that were subjected to cold stress. The notion of crossprotection whereby an acquired tolerance from sublethal stress can crossprotect against other stresses has been documented in other foodborne pathogens including E. coli  Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium  and L. monocytogenes  but is not well described in Cronobacter spp. 
 	C. sakazakii biofilms can form in processing environments on a variety of surfaces including silicon stainless steel plastic silicon and latex during stressful conditions such as nutrient limitation or desiccation which contributes to contamination risk in PIF and other products . Cronobacter spp. have been reported to produce biofilms with the highest cell density among the Enterobacteriaceae  further emphasizing the importance of good hygiene and regular cleaning in hospitals and homes. The persistence of mature biofilms in enteral feeding tubes could shed planktonic cells that enter the stomach of infants during feeding thus contributing to infantile infection . Furthermore C. sakazakii and other pathogens can enter a VBNC state during biofilm formation or PIF production . Biofilms are more resistant to disinfection methods and some of the biosynthesis pathways required to produce biofilms such as the colanic acid biosynthesis pathway have been linked to antibiotic desiccation heat and acid resistance .   
Infants have a lower gastric acidity and bile salt concentration as compared to adults  which may facilitate the survival of foodborne pathogens in the infant GI tract . C. sakazakii cells can survive at pH values as low as . a bile salt concentration of  a salt concentration up to  temperature as high as °C and over  days of desiccation . In fact the sublethal GI conditions in an infant may exacerbate C. sakazakii resistance to antimicrobial compounds produced by gut bacteria or probiotics . Furthermore exposure to sublethal acid and thermal conditions may increase the heat resistance of C. sakazakii during rehydration of PIF using water <°C 
 which supports the WHO recommendation of rehydrating PIF using water °C. There may also be a correlation between nlpD rpoS and envZ to modulate the environmental stress response of C. sakazakii thereby improving its acid resistance  however more research is needed to study the mechanisms.  
. Biological models used to study C. sakazakii  
.. Cell culture models 
Pathogens need to adhere to host cell surfaces to establish infection . Cell cultures have been widely used to study the different ways that pathogens can colonize and invade host cells to cause illness in humans . These cell models provide a controlled and simplistic representation of pathogenhost interaction . 
Adherence and invasion of C. sakazakii have been primarily studied using cell lines including Caco HT INT and Hep . These models are especially important to simulate the attachment and entry of C. sakazakii to intestinal cells. Human isolates of C. sakazakii have been found to be better at binding to tissue culture cells as compared to environmental strains . Following adherence C. sakazakii increased cell permeability and disrupted tight junctions due to nitric oxide production resulting in apoptosis . Bacteroides fragilis ZY and citral were shown to reduce C. sakazakii invasion into HT and Caco cell lines respectively . Nair and Venkitanarayanan  showed that OmpA in addition to the host cytoskeleton plays an important role in cellular invasion of INT. ParraFlores et al.  found that C. sakazakii isolates from PIF were able to invade Hep cells possibly due to the presence of outer membrane proteins. It should be noted however that experiments with different tissue culture cell lines need to be interpreted with caution as C. sakazakii adheres better to certain cell lines .  
.. Animal models 
Animal models such as rabbit pups neonatal rats mice and nematodes are used in lieu of human participants to study the pathophysiology of foodborne pathogens due to the safety ethical and cost implications . Animals can also be genetically or physically modified to fit the experimental needs. For example streptomycintreated mice and geriatric animal models have been developed to study infections caused by E. coli O:H and L. 
monocytogenes respectively . Animal models are infrequently used to study the pathogenesis of C. sakazakii because they cannot accurately replicate the in vivo interactions within an infant . However several studies using animal models suggest that probiotic bacteria may be able to reduce the intestinal colonization of C. sakazakii and severity of NEC in vivo . Probiotics may exert protective effects on the host by regulating the proinflammatory response or gut microbiota . Animal studies are useful to indicate whether prophylactic treatments can be further studied in infants. For example Gurien et al.  showed that as compared to the control group pretreatment of rabbit pups with L. lactis reduced the incidence rate of NEC caused by C. sakazakii. The reduction in NEC rate in the pretreated rabbit pups may be due to competitive exclusion of probiotics against C. sakazakii . 
.. Gastrointestinal models  
An advanced approach to study C. sakazakii in the GI tract of humans is by using GI models to assess the pathogen’s survival and subsequent environmental changes in the GI tract. As compared to in vivo animal models GI models can better mimic the human intestinal environment e.g. pH variation in the GI tract and colonic metabolome to provide a more accurate representation of hostpathogen interaction. The TNO in vitro GI model  is a multicompartment dynamic model that can mimic intestinal physiology for nutrition or metabolomic studies  whereas the SHIME  is a multicompartment dynamic simulator of the human GI tract that can simulate the stomach small intestine and the colon . The TIM has been used to study the survival of E. coli or probiotic bacteria  but its main advantage is the ability to mimic the luminal conditions in the GI tract through secretions absorption and removal of bioavailable compounds . In contrast the SHIME can evaluate interactions between the gut microbiota and/or foodborne pathogens due to its ability to inoculate the colon vessels with fecal samples from different age groups to analyze changes in the gut microbiota or metabolomics based on experimental parameters such as pH residence time and demographic . However the SHIME has its own limitations one of which is the inability to mimic normal peristalsis in the GI tract as it relies on stirrers to mix the GI fluids so GI interactions and movement dependent on peristalsis may not be accurately portrayed. The TIM and SHIME complement each other to better mimic the complex ecosystem within the GI tract  as both models have their unique advantages and disadvantages. Currently there is a knowledge gap on how C. sakazakii behaves in an in vitro gut model. Given the dynamic nature of an infant gut microbiota and its association with the development of infection the SHIME can be a useful tool to study the changes in gut microbiota in a simulated infant GI tract when exposed to C. sakazakii.  
 	 

	 
. Probiotics prebiotics and synbiotics 
 	As current measures have proven insufficient to eliminate C. sakazakii contamination and infection other preventative measures are required. Probiotics prebiotics and synbiotics may be promising control measures to inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii in the environment and within the infant GI tract. Furthermore some probiotic strains can have synergistic effects with prebiotic substrates i.e. synbiotics as the prebiotic is degraded into antimicrobial metabolites or used to alter the bacterial surface and improve adhesion to the intestinal epithelial layer . Therefore synbiotics may be better at mitigating the risk of infection due to foodborne pathogens such as C. sakazakii as compared to the independent application of probiotics or prebiotics.   
.. Probiotics 
FAO/WHO developed the first definition for probiotics: “live microorganisms which when administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit on the host” . A probiotic strain should have the following characteristics to confer benefits to the host 
: ) isolated from a human ) lacking in putative virulence genes ) sensitive to common antibiotics ) tolerant to GI conditions ) catalasenegative ) able to adhere to the intestinal epithelial membrane ) able to compete with native gut microbiota and ) able to directly or indirectly inhibit the growth i.e. bacteriostatic effect and colonization of potentially pathogenic bacteria. Research into probiotics has quickly expanded with over  articles being published between  and  using the term “probiotic” but proving the health benefits of probiotics such as improving gut health after the consumption of probiotics is challenging. Therefore governments have taken different regulatory approaches on food products containing probiotics .  
Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus genera are the earliest examples of probiotics included in food products as they are Generally Recognized as Safe and can impart general health benefits such as supporting a healthy GI tract and immune system  ). PIF can also be supplemented with probiotics however their application and scope of use in Canada is limited. Even among Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus spp. only Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB and 
Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus GG  are commercially available in PIF sold in Canada  at a dose of approximately  log CFU/ mL. The approval of BB and LGG may be due to the vast amounts of research that has been done on these specific strains to validate their safety and potential ability to exert health benefits on the host 
. However the probiotics have not yet been approved by Health Canada or the 
CFIA. Canadian probiotic supplements are designed for infants and contain either a single strain or a cocktail of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus spp. . The probiotic supplements have been reported to reduce the occurrence and mortality of NEC in premature and lowbirthweight infants by approximately  to  . While the benefits of probiotics to overall health continue to be studied research has shown several mechanisms by which probiotics can exert a bacteriostatic effect on foodborne pathogens. 
Probiotics can indirectly mitigate human infections by i) enhancing epithelial barrier physiology; ii) inhibiting virulence gene expression; iii) enhancing the host immune system; iv) directly attacking pathogens by producing metabolites; v) competing with the pathogens for nutrients and vi) adhering to the surface of GI cells thus providing competition for attachment . In the large intestine they primarily produce organic acids due to the absence of oxygen . In the stomach and small intestine the minute concentration of oxygen allows probiotics to produce HO in high enough quantities to directly inhibit pathogens however low concentrations of HO in the anaerobic environment of the large intestine can only reduce pathogen invasion rather than exerting a bactericidal effect . Different probiotic strains are very efficient in producing different compounds to inhibit pathogens. For example Lactobacillus casei and Lactobacillus acidophilus were found to produce bacteriocins that could inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii in reconstituted PIF  and Bifidobacterium spp. produce organic acids such as acetic acid lactic acid and formic acid that inhibit other pathogens .  
The effect of probiotics on gene expression of C. sakazakii has not been studied thus far but previous research has shown that probiotics can down regulate the virulence gene expression of other enteropathogens such as E. coli O:H and Clostridium  difficile . E. coli Nissle  a known probiotic strain was able to control Shigatoxin gene expression of enterohemorrhagic E. coli O:H and O:H in vitro by down regulating stx mRNA transcription . Bifidobacterium longum and other probiotic strains have also been shown to downregulate Shiga toxin gene expression in vitro and in vivo . It is possible that the downregulation of Shiga toxin gene expression was due to environmental stresses created by probiotics through the inhibition of the autoinducer or a similar autoinducer system . While the inhibitory effects of probiotics on enteropathogens have been documented the mechanisms by which they exert their protective effects require further investigation.  
... Postbiotics 
Probiotics are strictly regulated and concise guidelines for their application in clinical settings  are lacking thus creating an opportunity to study the application of their byproducts to achieve the same beneficial effects . Postbiotics have been defined as a “preparation of inanimate microorganisms and/or their components that confers a health benefit on the host” thereby containing inactivated microbial cells that may contain metabolites or cellular components to exert said health benefit . Postbiotics can originate from a probiotic strain and can be composed of cellfree supernatant  consisting of bacteriocins organic acids HO and other cellular compounds that can inhibit bacterial cells or biofilm formation . Awaisheh et al.  showed that L. casei and L. acidophilus 
CFS inhibited the growth of C. sakazakii on agar media and a liquid rehydrated infant formula model while Lin and Pan  demonstrated that Lactobacillus plantarum NTU  CFS contained an active antimicrobial compound named LBP that was able to inhibit C. sakazakii in vitro. Other Lactobacillus spp. CFS has been shown to weaken the membrane integrity and disrupt biofilm formation of C. sakazakii in vitro  indicating the potential for a multifaceted application of probiotic strains CFS. Several of the antimicrobial compounds in CFS were heat resistant which may be useful as food preservatives for manufacturing foods that are subject to high heat during processing e.g. spray drying of PIF . As postbiotics are composed of the bioactive components of an inactivated probiotic their mechanisms to exert a health benefit on the host are similar to their live counterpart. Postbiotics can modulate the immune system through the production of tolllike receptors reduce adhesion of pathogens to the gut epithelium by competitive exclusion or inhibit the growth of pathogens through bacteriocins . As shown in Table . there have been other successful applications of probiotic strains and their 
CFS in inhibiting C. sakazakii.  
.. Prebiotics 
Prebiotics were originally defined as nondigestible carbohydrates that are metabolized by the commensal gut microbiota in the colon . Recently the definition of prebiotics has been modified to include substrates used by the GI microbiota that confer health benefits to the host extending the substrate candidates to include more than just carbohydrates 
e.g. phenols and phytochemicals . To exert health benefits prebiotics should resist host digestion be fermented by gut microbes and selectively promote growth of beneficial bacteria e.g. Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium spp. . In infants prebiotics can also improve nutrient absorption decrease the translocation of pathogenic bacteria through gut maturation and enhance overall GI health . Common prebiotics included in PIF sold in Canada typically contain galactooligosaccharides  inulin or polydextrose  to provide the aforementioned health benefits to infants . B. infantis was found to metabolize HMOs but the enzymes used to break down HMOs are not present in other Bifidobacterium spp. more commonly found in adults such as B. longum and B. lactis . Furthermore prebiotics were shown to be heatresistant  thus providing important nutrients for gut maturation even in heattreated products e.g. pasteurized donor breast milk .   
Prebiotics including breast milk HMOs are capable of preventing pathogens and their toxins from adhering to intestinal cells by acting as molecular decoys in the GI tract indicating why early breastfeeding is a key factor in developing a healthy gut microbiome . Human milk oligosaccharides  are the first prebiotics consumed by infants comprising approximately . of breast milk and are broken down by certain species of bifidobacteria such as Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis B. longum subsp. longum B. bifidum and B. breve . However other species of Bifidobacterium and other gut microbiota can crossfeed on different metabolites including acetate and fucose released from HMO degradation . Breast feeding is typically done for the first  months of life  and during this time B. infantis is likely to dominate the infant gut microbiota due to the abundance of HMOs . The abundance of B. infantis and other Bifidobacterium spp. helps to develop a healthy infant gut microbiome in addition to modulating the immune system . Sialic acid on HMOs may play a role in reducing the risk of NEC pathogenesis through complex interactions with the infant immune system but the mechanisms are unclear . One possible method is through the degradation of sialic acid by bifidobacteria due to the production of sialidases located on the nannag locus  which results in competition for nutrients with opportunistic pathogens such as C. sakazakii and C. difficile that can also metabolize sialic acid in the colon . 
Prebiotics also can prevent pathogenic colonization and growth with the latter effect being due to gut microbe metabolism. GOS for example contains structures similar to the microvilli present in the colon and can interfere with pathogen specific receptors and subsequent binding . The effects of prebiotics on C. sakazakii and NEC are not well known but GOS and PDX have been shown to reduce adherence of C. sakazakii to the HEp cell line by  to  when used separately or combined . However the concentrations of GOS and PDX used in the latter study were higher than those present in PIF . Srinivasjois et al.  showed that supplementing infant formula with different prebiotic oligosaccharides significantly improved the growth of bifidobacteria but did not decrease the risk of NEC or other illnesses associated with C. sakazakii infection in preterm infants. Additionally prebiotics can affect C. difficile toxicity differently as demonstrated by analyzing changes in HT cell attachment and growth thus indicating that carbon source can played a factor in pathogen inhibition . In addition to indirectly decreasing the risk of infection by reducing pathogen adhesion prebiotics can also provide benefits to the host once metabolized by the gut microbiota.  
... Role of SCFA in inhibiting pathogens and promoting the development of a healthy 
gut 
Some SCFAs such as butyrate and propionate are commonly produced by commensal bacteria in the GI tract and have been extensively studied . Reduced levels of SCFA in the GI tract have been linked to various illnesses including obesity type II diabetes and autoimmune diseases in adults but their association with metabolic and immune conditions in infants is not well studied . In the human intestinal tract butyrate and propionate regulate inflammation epithelial barriers and intestinal motility and may be able to reduce the risk of various medical conditions such as colitis and intestinal inflammation . However it should be noted that acetate and lactate both have an important role to play as precursors for the production of butyrate and propionate . Some gut bacteria such as Eubacterium hallii can produce shortchain fatty acids from metabolites created by bifidobacterial fermentation which can play a role in inhibiting pathogens in the gut . The acid conjugates of SCFA such as acetic acid can diffuse freely in the cytoplasm of pathogens and this may ultimately compromise metabolic functions and disturb cell physiology .  
In moderate quantities SCFAs can regulate conditions associated with dysbiosis in infants e.g. maintain the gut barrier and reduce inflammation caused by the onset of NEC  but higher concentrations of SCFA may be toxic to infants. The normal concentration of total SCFA in humans range from  mM in the large intestine but concentrations  mM may be fatal to infants . While the mechanism of SCFA toxicity requires further study excess quantities of SCFA can cause NEC as it appears that they can reduce carbohydrate absorption and GI motility which damages gut mucosal integrity 
  the latter effect can increase SCFA accumulation and exacerbate intestinal injury . The potential risk of SCFA toxicity indicates that any underlying health conditions such as poor digestion in infants should be considered prior to the application of prebiotics. Conversely high levels of SCFA in fecal samples may indicate lower microbial diversity in the gut and higher gut permeability both of which are associated with several health complications including obesity glycemia and hypertension . However there is insufficient evidence on the role of a specific SCFA to maintain a healthy gut as each metabolite is part of a complex gut ecosystem. 
Prebiotics and SCFA can benefit host health but their success is limited to the gut microbiota present in the host. If an individual lacks the microbes necessary to metabolize the prebiotics consumed possibly due to dysbiosis it is unlikely that the prebiotic will confer health benefits to the host . In this scenario the individual may benefit instead from a synbiotic supplementation.  
.. Synbiotics 
A synbiotic is defined as “a mixture comprising live microorganisms and substrate selectively utilized by host microorganisms that confers a health benefit on the host” . During its conception synbiotic supplementation was thought to prolong the shelflife of foods containing live microbes increase the survival of probiotics and stimulate metabolism of the gut microbiota . The International Scientific Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics  established different subsets for synbiotic products to better describe different types of synbiotic products that can be formulated . Other beneficial claims of synbiotics include larger populations of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium spp. in the GI tract improved immune system function and reduced risk of bacterial infection in higher risk patients . Since the gut microbiota and probiotics respond differently to prebiotics compatibility is an important factor in formulating synbiotics.  
 

When Lactobacillus strains were grown in the presence of different prebiotics such as inulin fructooligosaccharide  and lactulose L. plantarum demonstrated the most rapid growth with inulin . Differences in oligosaccharide fermentation were shown to exist between L. lactis subsp. lactis strains as one strain possesses specific enzymes for the transport and hydrolysis of palatinose yet another strain was unable to ferment palatinose . In another study Bifidobacterium spp. was demonstrated to be better at fermenting glucooligosaccharides as compared to Lactobacillus spp. possibly due to the presence of numerous genes for carbohydrate metabolism . Similarly ?galactosidases in bifidobacteria are better at hydrolyzing ? and ? linked GOS as compared to lactobacilli . To summarize different bacterial species and strains within a species produce unique enzymes that make them more compatible with certain prebiotics .  
The use of synbiotic supplementation in infants has shown encouraging results  but these studies are rarely conducted possibly due to ethical concerns. Ingestion of a synbiotic supplement in preterm infants can decrease the risk of disease by increasing the populations of beneficial gut microbiota and/or reducing pathogen adhesion . Although more studies are needed to validate the findings synbiotic supplementation in premature infants may have additional benefits as randomized clinical trials have shown a decrease in NEC cases relative to the control group .  
There has not been any research on the effect of synbiotics on C. sakazakii although several studies have shown reduced morbidity or mortality of NEC after synbiotic application  and other studies have shown the beneficial effects of synbiotics on other foodborne pathogens such as Salmonella enterica Shigella sonnei and enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic E. coli . The antimicrobial potential of synbiotics is likely dependent on the pathogensynbiotic combination as E. coli and Campylobacter jejuni were inhibited by synbiotics when cultured in a multibatch culture system containing a synbiotic with a pathogen but in a single continuous culture system only C. jejuni was inhibited . The excess carbon source in the continuous culture prevented nutrient competition suggesting that antimicrobial compounds i.e. SCFA were produced and that inhibition efficacy can differ depending on the pathogenprobiotic combination . ValdesVarela et al.  further expanded on the species dependency premise to include substrate dependency. 
For example B. longum and B. breve instead of B. bifidum or B. animalis and in the presence of 
FOS instead of inulin inhibited C. difficile . Another study noted that B. longum in the presence of the prebiotic isomaltooligosaccharides inhibited E. coli O:H and E. coli O better than Lactobacillus fermentum with FOS . The interaction between synbiotics and pathogens is complex and requires sophisticated models to better determine their efficacy as a potential treatment for the control of foodborne pathogens.  
 	 
. Research rationale and hypothesis 
Despite the low number of cases Cronobacter can cause severe illness in infants elderly and immunocompromised individuals and can subsequently lead to the longterm chronic sequelae of infants. Due to their ubiquity and resilience current preventative measures to control invasive Cronobacter infections during early infancy would benefit from alternative approaches to minimize any potential risks to infants. Reporting of Cronobacter infections is not required in most countries including most of the United States and sporadic cases have been documented which suggest that the true number of Cronobacter infections is underreported . Probiotics prebiotics and synbiotics are wellplaced to play a major role in this regard and can potentially act to prevent intestinal colonization of infants by pathogenic Cronobacter spp. or other enteropathogens. However current research on their efficacy to inactivate or inhibit the growth of pathogenic Cronobacter spp. is limited. While there is evidence that the consumption of probiotics prebiotics and synbiotics can reduce the risk of infection through competitive exclusion the production of antimicrobial compounds or competition for nutrients further research is required to validate these hypotheses using more complex in vitro models and in vivo studies. The development of comprehensive in vitro models that simulate the human gut provides an exciting opportunity to study in realtime the interactions between Cronobacter spp. and the native infant gut microbiota in vitro.  
Breast milk is known to be the ideal nutrition for infants as it not only contains beneficial bacteria such as Lactobacillus Bifidobacterium Rothia Enterococcus and Veillonella spp. and prebiotic HMOs but also provides immune factors to stimulate the immunological development of infants . Breast milk is associated with an increase in the levels of Bifidobacterium and as the gut matures Akkermansia muciniphila Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and 
Lactobacillus spp. among other obligate anaerobes also increase in numbers . This thesis proposes to investigate the antimicrobial properties of potential probiotic strains and a potential synbiotic mixture against C. sakazakii in an infant SHIME. The potential probiotic strains will be comprised of various lactic acid bacteria and the prebiotic will be a commercially available substrate used in infant formula called Vivinal GOS. For this thesis we hypothesized that a synbiotic mixture will have an enhanced bacteriostatic effect on Cronobacter sakazakii as compared to an independent application of potential multistrain probiotics. 
. Research objectives 
The objectives of this study were as follows:  
Characterize which lactic acid bacteria strains are candidates to be used as potential probiotics  and in the potential synbiotic mixture . 
Assess whether the potential synbiotic mixture and the lactic acid bacteria can inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii in the large intestine compartment of an infant SHIME. 
Assess whether C. sakazakii lactic acid bacteria and the potential synbiotic in objective  affect the metabolomics and gut microbiota composition of the infant SHIME.  
Using bioinformatic analysis evaluate the interactions between metabolites and bacterial genera in the infant SHIME vessels. 
 	 
 Chapter  – Selection of a potential synbiotic against Cronobacter sakazakii 
Chapter  outlines the severity of illnesses that C. sakazakii can cause to infants. Furthermore we discuss the efficacy of probiotics prebiotics and synbiotics in mitigating the growth and pathogenicity of C. sakazakii in vitro and in vivo. However there is a lack of research in whether synbiotics can inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii and whether synbiotics can perform as well or better than probiotics in inhibiting C. sakazakii. Therefore this chapter summarizes the experiments conducted to formulate a potential synbiotic to be used in an in vitro gut model in a future study in addition to narrowing down potential probiotics to be used in comparison. The following sections outline the preliminary experiments conducted to narrow down the list of LAB strains in addition to finding a potential synbiotic formulation to be used in the SHIME based on the following criteria: ) inhibition of C. sakazakii ) antibiotic resistance profile of LAB and ) compatibility with Vivinal GOS  as the potential prebiotic.  
. Materials and Methods 
.. Bacterial strains and culture conditions 
A total of  bacterial strains  were used in this study and were all obtained from the lab of Dr. Jeffrey Farber . The new designated names for the former 
Lactobacillus genera will be collectively referred to as “former Lactobacillus genus/strains” when referring to the former Lactobacillus strains used in this study however other Lactobacillus strains mentioned from the literature will remain as such. Bacterial stocks were prepared from a lawn of an isolated colony and stored at °C in freezing media   v/v glycerol  and  v/v dimethyl sulfoxide ). All LAB strains were grown at °C in De Man Rogosa and Sharpe  agar  under anaerobic conditions using an AnaeroPack . All C. sakazakii and Enterobacter tabaci strains were grown at °C on Brain Heart Infusion agar  agar  under aerobic conditions.  
.. Growth inhibition assay 
Antimicrobial activity of the LAB strains against C. sakazakii was conducted based on the protocol established by Gelda et al.  with modifications. E. tabaci E and L. plantarum ATCC  were used as the negative and positive controls respectively. LAB strains were incubated anaerobically at °C in MRS broth  for ± h whereas C. sakazakii and E. tabaci strains were grown aerobically at °C in BHI broth for ± 
h. The following day a lawn of the C. sakazakii was swabbed onto BHI agar by using a sterile cotton swab  and allowed to dry for  min. After the lawn is dry a   drop of a LAB culture was pipetted on the C. sakazakii lawn and left to dry. Once dry the plates were incubated at °C anaerobically for ± h. Inhibition zones  was measured with a ruler as described in Figure .. Each strain was tested in triplicate on the same plate and the assay was repeated in triplicate. LAB strains that produced a zone of inhibition greater than the median value of  mm were used in the prebiotic compatibility experiment as outlined in section ... 
.. Antibiotic resistance of lactic acid bacteria strains 
Each LAB strain was incubated at °C in MRS broth for ± h. The overnight culture was diluted to an OD value of . using a Beckman DU  UV/Vis Spectrophotometer for this experiment to standardize the concentration of LAB in each culture. Antibiotic disks were left at room temperature for  h prior to usage. The antibiotics used in this study were ampicillin chloramphenicol cephalothin ciprofloxacin erythromycin gentamycin rifampcin tetracycline and vancomycin . The antibiotics chosen were based on previous literature on antibiotic resistance of various probiotic strains.  
Each strain was spread onto a plate of MRS agar using a sterile cotton swab and left to dry for  min. Using sterile forceps the antibiotic disks were placed on the dried lawn of LAB culture and incubated at °C for  h anaerobically. The next day inhibition zones  were measured as described in section ... The inhibition zones were classified as sensitive resistant or intermediate based on the guidelines provided by the Clinical and 
Laboratory Institute .   
.. Growth compatibility of bacterial strains with Vivinal GOS 
LAB strains that produced a zone of inhibition against C. sakazakii greater than the median value of mm and did not exhibit atypical resistance to common antibiotics were used in this compatibility experiment. VGOS was chosen as the prebiotic substrate as it is marketed as a commercial prebiotic substrate used in infant formula. MRS broth without dextrose  was made following manufacturer’s instructions and added with either  VGOS  or  dextrose  as the control . LuriaBertani  broth was supplemented with  VGOS  or  dextrose  to determine the growth compatibility of C. sakazakii in the presence of VGOS or dextrose.  
 	An isolated colony of the LAB or C. sakazakii strain to be evaluated was inoculated into MRS or LB broth respectively and incubated at °C overnight. The LAB strains were incubated anaerobically and C. sakazakii was incubated aerobically to make the overnight cultures. The following day   of the overnight culture was added to separate tubes containing media with modified sugar content . LAB strains were added into MRS with  VGOS or  dextrose whereas C. sakazakii was added into LB with  VGOS or  dextrose. After the addition of the overnight culture into the modified broth media  µL of the culture was serially diluted tenfold in . peptone water  and enumerated on either MRS or BHI agar for the LAB or C. sakazakii respectively in triplicates. The experiment was repeated in triplicates. The samples were incubated at °C for  h anaerobically for the LAB and aerobically for C. sakazakii. The samples were enumerated again after  h on the same agar media as described.  
 	The change in log CFU/mL was calculated for each strain under different carbohydrate conditions and a prebiotic activity score was determined based on the following equation from Huebner et al. :  
	???????? ?????? ???? ?????? ???? ?????? ?????????????? ??????  	???????? ?????? ???? ???? ???? ???? ?????????????? ?????? 
?	  
???????? ?????? ???? ?????? ???? ?????? ??????? ???????????????? 	???????? ?????? ???? ???? ???? ???? ??????? ???????????????? 
The equation calculates the difference in growth between the LAB strains in MRS media containing VGOS as compared to MRS plus dextrose as well as C. sakazakii in LB broth containing VGOS as compared to LB broth containing dextrose. A prebiotic activity score would allow one to determine if a substrate used  would allow for better growth of beneficial or commensal strains as compared to glucose. More specifically a positive prebiotic activity score indicates that the probiotic strains can grow better on a specific prebiotic substrate as compared to pathogens.  
. Statistical analysis 
The experiments were repeated in triplicates  and all values were reported as mean ± standard deviation. Residual analyses including the ShapiroWilk tests for normality were conducted to ensure that the data met the statistical test assumptions such that all data were homogenous randomly distributed and independent of treatment and design effects. Residual analyses analysis of variance  and Tukey’s posthoc test were conducted using Statistical Analysis Software  to determine statistical differences in growth of LAB and C. sakazakii strains in VGOS and dextrose and between levels of C. 
sakazakii in different SHIME systems. A type I error rate of .  was applied to 
all statistical tests.   
. Results 
.. Growth inhibition of C. sakazakii by lactic acid bacteria 
The inhibitory properties of the LAB strains  against C. sakazakii were tested by a drop plate assay to narrow down which strains would be the most promising candidates to be used as potential probiotics or in a potential synbiotic. All LAB strains were able to produce inhibitors against all tested C. sakazakii strains. A number of LAB strains  were able to produce an inhibitory effect of greater than the mm selected threshold against C. sakazakii. In contrast the fewest strains  to exceed the mm minimum threshold were against C. sakazakii . Strains from the Pediococcus and former Lactobacillus genera specifically L. rhamnosus P. pentosaceus E and P. pentosaceus E produced mm zone of inhibition. In contrast none of the Lactococcus and Leuconostoc strains were able to produce zones of inhibition exceeding mm. A summary of the growth inhibition results against C. sakazakii can be seen in Figure ..  
 
 
 	 

 
 
.. Antibiotic susceptibility of LAB strains 
Probiotics should not be used in food products if they contain transmissible antimicrobial resistance genes . Thus we evaluated the susceptibility of various LAB strains to some common antibiotics as determined based on a literature search on antibiotic resistance of various probiotic strains to determine whether they conferred resistance for the group of tested antimicrobials . Most strains of the former Lactobacillus spp. were resistant to vancomycin gentamycin and ciprofloxacin however L. reuteri C exhibited some sensitivity to gentamycin while L. reuteri C and L. rhamnosus were susceptible to ciprofloxacin. Furthermore unlike the L. reuteri C exhibited atypical resistance to tetracycline and was excluded from subsequent experiments. Most Lactococcus spp. showed resistance towards chloramphenicol erythromycin and rifampcin. In contrast Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris was susceptible to chloramphenicol and erythromycin and resistant against ciprofloxacin. All Pediococcus spp. were resistant to vancomycin and gentamycin but only the P. pentosaceus strains were resistant to rifampcin. L. citreum was only resistant to vancomycin and ciprofloxacin. As L. reuteri C exhibited resistance to tetracycline as compared to the other other strains from the former Lactobacillus genus it was excluded from the list of potential candidates to be used in the prospective synbiotic.  
 
 
 
 
 

.. Prebiotic compatibility of lactic acid bacteria and C. sakazakii strains with VGOS 
The strains used in this experiment needed to ) produce greater than the mm selected threshold against at least one C. sakazakii strain and ) not exhibit any atypical resistance to common antibiotics. LAB strains from the Lactococcus and Leuconostoc genera did not produce mm zone of inhibition against any C. sakazakii strain. Therefore the strains used were from the Pediococcus and former Lactobacillus genera. Additionally among the Pediococcus and former Lactobacillus genera only L. reuteri C was excluded due to exhibiting atypical resistance to tetracycline. This experiment was conducted to determine which LAB strains were able to grow better in VGOS as compared to dextrose and whether the strains could outgrow C. 
sakazakii given the difference in the two carbohydrates. 
The change in levels of LAB and C. sakazakii strains after  h of growth in media containing either  VGOS or  dextrose can be seen in Figure .. Change in log CFU/mL was based on the difference in bacterial levels after inoculation into the modified media and after  h postinoculation. Of the  LAB strains tested only L. plantarum KG L. rhamnosus P. pentosaceus E and P. pentosaceus E grew significantly more in  VGOS . Interestingly of the  C. sakazakii strains only strain  grew significantly more in  VGOS .   
Relative to the other C. sakazakii strains C. sakazakii strains  and  demonstrated poor growth in  VGOS as compared to dextrose as  LAB strains had positive activity scores . On the other hand C. sakazakii  grew significantly better in VGOS  and better than most of the LAB strains as most had negative activity scores. The prebiotic activity scores obtained in this study indicate that L. plantarum KG L. rhamnosus and P. pentosaceus E and E grew better in VGOS as compared to dextrose as supported by their significantly higher growth in the prebiotic substrate . However against C. sakazakii  which was the only C. sakazakii strain to grow significantly better on VGOS as compared to dextrose  positive activity scores were only obtained with L. rhamnosus and P. pentosaceus E.
 
 

 
 . Discussion .. Selection criteria for the potential probiotics and synbiotic used in infant SHIME 
The bacterial strains used as potential probiotics and for the potential synbiotic to be used in the infant SHIME were based on the following criteria: ) ability to inhibit C. sakazakii ) did not possess any extrinsic antimicrobial resistance genes and ) compatibility with a commercial prebiotic substrate for the potential synbiotic. The potential probiotics used in this study consist of lactic acid bacteria . The genera within the LAB group have been previously documented to have probiotic potential  but the strains used in this study have not been confirmed to be probiotics. Further research is required to determine whether they meet the criteria  to be classified as probiotics .    
.. Inhibition of C. sakazakii using a drop plate assay 
The inhibition properties of the LAB strains against C. sakazakii were tested by a drop plate assay to narrow down which strains would be the most promising candidates be used as potential probiotics or a potential synbiotic. Strains that produced at least a mm zone of inhibition which was determined to be the median zone diameter across all strains against at least one C. sakazakii strain were selected to be a part of the subsequent experiments. MRS agar was chosen instead of BHI a nonselective agar as the LABs were not able to produce any zone of inhibition on BHI but still supported the growth of C. sakazakii. The drop plates containing the lawns of C. sakazakii and droplets of LAB were incubated under anaerobic conditions to simulate conditions in the colon. E. tabaci E was used as a negative control as it did not produce any zones of inhibition on MRS agar under anaerobic conditions. 
 Previous studies on the inhibition capabilities of these genera against foodborne pathogens have been documented and primarily attributed to the formation of organic acids or bacteriocins . Interestingly under anaerobic conditions there may not be a sufficient concentration of HO present to induce a bactericidal effect but may be able to reduce the virulence of foodborne pathogens . Pediococcus and the former Lactobacillus genera also produced more potent inhibitors than Lactococcus and Leuconostoc as the latter genera have been reported to be more sensitive to acidic conditions than the former  which may limit their ability to grow on MRS agar and produce acids or metabolites to inhibit C. sakazakii. Although the pH of the agar was not tested in this study to determine the production of acid during incubation the differences in isolation source of the C. sakazakii strains may also affect the efficacy of the LAB strains as some of the C. sakazakii strains may be acidtolerant. Chon et al.  found that clinical Cronobacter spp. isolates were more resistant to disinfectants as compared to environmental Cronobacter spp. isolates possibly due to the sublethal stresses encountered in environmental settings that can then increase resistance to antimicrobial agents. In another study Oliveira et al.  reported that environmental conditions could affect the survival rates of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium DT cells in simulated gastric and intestinal fluids. The differences in S. Typhimurium survival may be due to the adaptation of 
Salmonella and other foodborne pathogens to lowacid conditions leading to increased 
resistance to acid and other stresses in other environmental conditions . 
.. Antibiotic susceptibility of LAB strains 
Probiotics should not be used in food products if they contain transmissible antimicrobial resistance genes  highlighting the importance of testing the antimicrobial susceptibility of potential probiotic strains. Resistance to tetracycline in lactobacilli may be related to the origin of the strain as resistance to antibiotics can be acquired within the food chain through horizontal gene transfer . Horizontal gene transfer is more likely to occur in environments where antibiotic use is more widespread such as animal farms which can transfer antibiotic resistant genes to other bacteria through mobile genetic elements like plasmids and transposons . L. reuteri ATCC  a commercially available probiotic was found to be resistant to tetracycline due to the presence of tet a potentially transferable tetracycline resistance gene that resides on a plasmid . 
Conjugative transposons containing antibioticresistance genes can be inserted into plasmids or chromosomes . Bifidobacterium spp. have also been reported to harbor tetracycline resistant genes that has the potential to be transferred to other bacteria some of which may be pathogenic . To better determine whether the resistance of an antibiotic is innate or acquired the broth microdilution test and PCR assays may be more accurate than the disk diffusion method. Temmerman et al.  found that enterococci isolates that exhibited vancomycin resistance on disc diffusion were susceptible based on broth dilution and PCR. A combination of phenotypic and genotypic testing is ideal as the former does not identify intrinsic resistance whereas the latter may lead to false assumptions of antibiotic resistance . Additionally the combination of phenotypic and genotypic results could potentially be used to revise current regulatory guidelines on the safety of LAB with regards to antibiotic resistance . 
.. Prebiotic compatibility of LAB strains with Vivinal GOS 
VGOS is mainly comprised of galactooligosaccharides  which have been frequently studied and is widely considered to be a prebiotic . However the effectiveness of VGOS as a prebiotic remains to be proven as few studies have studied its selective utilization by the infant gut microbiota . Despite the lack of evidence that VGOS can be considered a prebiotic GOS is one of two prebiotics used in infant formula sold in Canada thus making it a good prebiotic candidate for the purpose of this study.  
The prebiotic compatibility test was a modified experiment developed by Huebner et al.  with some modifications. The experiment is meant to ) determine which LAB would best metabolize VGOS as compared to dextrose as the control carbohydrate and ) evaluate which potential probiotic strains would be best supported by the substrate as compared to the growth of C. sakazakii by calculating the prebiotic activity score. Overall this experiment was done to try and determine what would be the optimal combination of LAB and VGOS to be used as a potential synbiotic for future experiments in the Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem . 
Unlike the other Pediococcus and former Lactobacillus strains tested L. plantarum KG L. rhamnosus and P. pentosaceus E and E grew significantly better  in  
VGOS as compared to  dextrose. Previous research has shown that the ability of bacterial strains to metabolize prebiotics may be genus and strain dependent. For example L. plantarum demonstrated the most rapid growth in inulin as compared to other former Lactobacillus strains when grown in the presence of different prebiotics which include inulin FOS and lactulose . L. lactis subsp. lactis strains differed in their ability to ferment oligosaccharides as one strain was found to possess specific enzymes to ferment palatinose but another strain was unable to ferment palatinose . Grimoud et al.  found that Bifidobacterium spp. was better at fermenting GOS as compared to former 
Lactobacillus spp. In summary the unique enzymes produced by different bacterial species and strains within a species could make them more likely to metabolize certain prebiotics .  
. 
 Chapter  – Bioinformatics and culturebased evaluation of the bacteriostatic properties of lactic acid bacteria and a potential synbiotic against Cronobacter sakazakii in an infant SHIME 
Chapter  outlined the experiments conducted to select the potential probiotics and synbiotic used for the infant SHIME experiment. In the experiments described in this chapter the SHIME was inoculated with the fecal matter of a onemonth old infant to evaluate the survival of C. sakazakii. A onemonth old infant was chosen as the donor as this age group reflects the demographic that would be most susceptible to C. sakazakii infection. The SHIME experiment aimed to ) assess the survival of C. sakazakii over a period of approximately two weeks with and without treatments  ) evaluate the changes in metabolomics and microbial community composition in the proximal and distal colon vessels of the SHIME and ) identify possible interactions between and within the metabolites and microbial community to gain a mechanistic insight into the survival trends of C. sakazakii.  
. Materials and methods 
.. Experimental design of the triple SHIME 
The triple infant SHIME used in this study was adapted from a TWINSHIME system initially created by ProDigest . The triple SHIME consisted of three parallel SHIME systems each system was comprised of three doublejacketed glass vessels to simulate the stomach and small intestine  proximal colon and distal colon. The triple SHIME was maintained at  using a water bath to circulate water. Anaerobic conditions were maintained by flushing the SHIME systems with nitrogen. The pH of each proximal and distal colon vessel was monitored daily and adjusted to pH values of .–. and .. respectively using . M HCl and . M NaOH to simulate physiological conditions.  
The proximal and distal colon vessels contained basal feed at a volume of  mL and 
 mL respectively. The basal feed was obtained from ProDigest and contained the following 
: pectin  starch  cellobiose  proteose peptone  mucin  lactose  casein  whey proteins lactalbumin  and LcysteinHCl . The basal feed was made by mixing the powder with distilled water and homogenizing before autoclaving. Prior to use the basal feed was acidified to a pH value of  using concentrated HCl. Pancreatic juice was made in addition to the basal feed based on the following composition : NaHCO  Oxgall  pancreatin from porcine pancreas . A volume of  mL of pancreatic juice and  mL basal feed was transferred to the ST/SI vessels three times every day and mixed before being transferred through the SHIME tubes simultaneously .

 
.. Preparation of fecal slurry 
The collection of infant fecal matter and its use in the triple SHIME were approved by the research ethics board at the University of Guelph . Fecal samples were collected from a healthy onemonth old infant. The infant was of normal birth weight and gestational age and was breast fed  and had no history of sickness or antibiotic use. Fecal samples were collected in diapers at the donor’s residence and frozen. The samples were kept frozen using ice packs in a Styrofoam box during transportation to CRIFS and immediately stored at  prior to fecal extraction from the diapers. Fecal samples were extracted from the diapers aseptically and transferred into  mL Falcon tubes. Both the tubes and the samples were kept frozen throughout the extraction process to minimize thawing and potential loss of microbes in the fecal samples. The tubes were weighed before and after to obtain the net weight of the fecal samples in each tube.  
On the day of the SHIME inoculation the fecal slurry was mixed with sterilized phosphate buffer  containing: KHPO  
KHPO  sodium thioglycolate . Prior to use  mg of sodium dithionite  was added to the buffer solution. The buffer solution was added to the partially thawed tubes containing fecal samples at a volume of   and homogenized by pipetting up and down in the tube. After homogenization the proximal and distal colon vessels were inoculated with   of the fecal inoculum.  
 
.. Stabilization and treatment period 
After fecal inoculation a stabilization period which lasted approximately three weeks began. The triple SHIME was considered stable based on   reproducibility of the SCFAs for four consecutive days. Sampling and quantification of the SCFAs were done as described in section ... Once the triple SHIME was stable the treatment period began. 
Throughout the SHIME run the following checks were performed routinely: ) daily pH checks of each PC and DC vessel ) acid/base consumption  days each week and ) volume check at the end of every week. The pH of the proximal and distal colon vessels was measured using internal  and external pH probes . The difference in pH readings between internal and external probes were calculated and the pH range of the vessels could be adjusted accordingly if necessary to maintain the pH range described in section .. based on the external pH reading. The acid and base consumption of each vessel was consistently monitored by the SHIME and exported to Microsoft Excel every other day. During the treatment period monitoring the acid and base consumption of the different SHIME systems was another indication of microbial activity. Volume checks were done at the end of each week to monitor the pump speed for feed and pancreatic juice. After the volume check the pump duration was adjusted accordingly to ensure that the right amount of feed and pancreatic juice was aliquoted into the different ST/SI vessels prior to mechanical transfer to the proximal colon vessels.  
Each SHIME system received two treatments spanning one week each with SHIME  representing the control for the entire duration of the twoweek treatment period . The selected C. sakazakii and LAB strains  were grown in BHI or MRS broth respectively overnight at  then diluted : the following day in fresh BHI or MRS broth and incubated for a further  h at . For the potential synbiotic the overnight cultures of LAB were centrifuged at  x g for  mins at room temperature and resuspended in MRS which did not contain any carbohydrates containing  VGOS to ensure that the prebiotic substrate was not metabolized prior to inoculation into the SHIME vessel. The cultures were mixed in equal volumes and inoculated at a volume of   into the proximal colon vessels of each SHIME system.  
	Samples from the proximal and distal colon vessels were taken at regular time intervals to enumerate C. sakazakii survival and for metabolomic analysis. Samples were seriallydiluted in . PW  plated on Brilliance C. sakazakii agar  in duplicate and incubated for  h at  to allow C. sakazakii to grow better and be more visually distinct from the culturable gut microbiota.  
.. Metabolomics 
Metabolomic analysis of the triple SHIME was conducted using D H nuclear magnetic  spectroscopy. Samples were taken from the proximal and distal colon SHIME vessels and passed through a sterile syringe filter containing  ?m  pore size followed by a second filtration with a ./. ?m pore size . 
The internal standard  and sodium azide in DO Chenomx Inc. Alberta) was added to the final filtrate of each sample at a :  ratio to obtain a final concentration of . ± . mM DSS. Prepared samples were aliquoted into  mm diameter glass NMR tubes  and stored at ºC in the dark. Samples were scanned on a  MHz spectrometer at the Advanced Analysis Centre  within  h of preparation.   
NMR spectra were analyzed using the Chenomx NMR Suite version . . The software compiles information from the Chenomx and Human Metabolome Database  to generate a library of metabolites that can be profiled. Prior to profiling the metabolites within a sample the spectra were corrected and calibrated to the DSS reference peak signature to obtain a more accurate quantitative analysis of the metabolites. Metabolites were profiled by matching the database template with the sample spectra. Once matched the software calculated the concentration of each metabolite. Once all the samples were profiled the data was exported to Microsoft Excel for further analysis.  
.. SHIME community composition through S rRNA gene sequencing  
... DNA Extraction 
SHIME samples were taken at various timepoints and stored in a °C freezer prior to extraction for genomic DNA . Thawed SHIME samples totaling  mL were collected and centrifuged at  x g for  min to pelletize the bacterial cells and the supernatant was discarded. A volume of  mL of InhibitEx buffer and . g of . mm zirconia beads  were added to the tubes containing the SHIME bacterial pellets and subjected to bead beating at  rpm for  min . Following bead beating the tubes containing the bacterial pellets buffer and beads were boiled in a water bath for  min. The tubes were centrifuged at  x g for  min and the supernatant was used in subsequent extraction steps following the manufacturer’s instructions with some modifications to the final elution step. DNA was eluted in   of warmed elution buffer and incubated for  min before centrifuging at  x g for  min. The same buffer was used to reelute DNA once more . Eluted DNA was quantified and qualified using Qubit and QIAexpert  respectively. The gDNA was stored at °C for downstream applications.  
... Library preparation and sequencing 
PCR amplification targeting the v region of the S rRNA gene was performed using the F/R primers  in addition to Nextera XT Index v sequences. The PCR reactions were conducted on a well plate containing   of template 
DNA   each forward and reverse primer sequences at  nM and   of Invitrogen Platinum PCR SuperMix High Fidelity  to make a total PCR reaction volume was of  . Thermocycler conditions were as follows: an initial denaturation step at °C for  min; followed by  cycles of denaturation at °C for  s annealing at °C for  s elongation at °C for s; and  cycles of the same parameters but with annealing at °C with a final extension step at °C for  min. The annealing temperature comprised of a .°C increment touchdown starting at °C for  cycles followed by °C for  cycles. PCR products were purified using AMPure XP beads  according to the Illumina S metagenomic sequencing library preparation guide and quantified on the 
Qubit. Purified libraries normalized to  nM for each library and   of each library was pooled for sequencing at the Genomics Facility in the Advanced Analysis Center University of Guelph ON Canada. Sequencing data from the Miseq were processed using the QIIME  pipeline and the DADA plugin . Classification of operational taxonomical units  to the genus level was conducted using the pretrained SILVA  
 OTUs from F/R region of sequences . Validation of the Cronobacter genus from the SILVA classifier was done by comparing amplicon sequences to the National Center for Biotechnology Information  database using the nucleotide BLAST and the resulting hits allowed for confirmation of the genus and approximate speciation of C. sakazakii according to their closest match .  
.. Statistical analysis 
The results obtained from the proximal colon and distal colon were pooled together as two biological replicates for statistical analysis . All statistical analyses were conducted using R . Metabolites were analyzed based on the: ) changes in metabolite concentration for each SHIME system ) differences in metabolite profile between treatment periods for each SHIME system and combined ) correlations between changes in metabolite concentration and C. sakazakii levels. Changes in metabolite concentration were standardized by unit variance  and visualized on a heat map . Metabolites were grouped together into clusters based on the similarities in the change in concentration. The relationships between metabolite profiles for each SHIME system and for all SHIMEs and their respective treatments were evaluated using a Principal Component Analysis  biplot using the factoextra package on R . 
Metabolite concentrations were standardized using unit variance as described. Regression analysis was evaluated using the ggscatter function from the ggpubr R package and visualized using ggplot . Significant correlation between metabolite concentration and C. sakazakii levels were determined using a pvalue of ..   
 	Sequencing results were analyzed for alpha and beta diversity on R using the phyloseq package . Relative abundances of microbial phyla and genera were visualized on a proportional stacked area graph on ggplot. The alphadiversity metric was measured based on the Shannon and GiniSimpson indices which calculates the species diversity considering species richness and evenness within various metadata. Diversity metrics were then exported and visualized on a boxplot using ggplot. Significant differences in alphadiversity measures were calculated based on the nonparametric pairwise Wilcoxon Rank Sum test. The betadiversity metric was calculated based on unweighted UniFrac and BrayCurtis dissimilarity and visualized on a principal coordinate analysis  using the phyloseq and ggplot packages. Significant differences between groups were calculated based on permutational multivariate analysis of variance  statistical tests. PERMANOVA was conducted using the adonis function  on the vegan package . Spearman’s rank correlation was used to calculate correlations between and within metabolites and the microbial community and calculated using the rcorr function on the ltm package . Correlations and their associated pvalues were visualized on a heat map. Pvalues obtained from the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test PERMANOVA and Spearman’s rank correlation were adjusted using the BenjaminiHochberg false discovery 
rate.  
. Results 
.. Survival of C. sakazakii in infant SHIME 
A cocktail of  Pediococcus and  former Lactobacillus strains  as chosen systematically based on the experiments described in Chapter  with and without  VGOS were used for the potential synbiotic  and probiotic  treatments respectively. A total of  different C. sakazakii strains were inoculated in all of the proximal colon vessels of the SHIME at the beginning of the treatment period. The levels of the C. sakazakii cocktail and LAB used were equivalent . The change in C. 
sakazakii levels in the proximal and distal colons of the SHIME throughout the two treatment periods is shown in Figure .. In the first  days C. sakazakii decreased by  log CFU/mL for all SHIME systems . However at  and  days there was a significant difference in C. sakazakii levels between SHIME   and the other SHIME systems . Between  to  days SHIME   and   had similar growth trends for C. sakazakii. In both systems C. sakazakii grew by approximately . log CFU/mL whereas C. sakazakii decreased by  log CFU/mL in SHIME . At  days C. sakazakii levels in 
SHIME  increased by . log CFU/mL whereas the levels decreased by . and . log 
CFU/mL in SHIME  and   respectively.  
The second treatment period began on the th day and the treatment for SHIME  and  was reversed. SHIME  received the LAB only treatment and SHIME  received the LAB + VGOS treatment. There was no significant difference in C. sakazakii levels between all SHIME systems between  and  days . C. sakazakii levels reduced by . log CFU/mL in 
SHIME  now containing the LAB + VGOS treatment and SHIME  but increased by . log CFU/mL in SHIME  which contained the LAB treatment. At  days there was a significant difference in C. sakazakii levels between SHIME  and the other SHIMEs . On day  SHIME  was significantly different than SHIME   but was not significantly different than SHIME  . On the other hand SHIME  was not significantly different than 
SHIME  . Throughout the second treatment period C. sakazakii levels decreased by 
. log CFU/mL in the control  system. In contrast C. sakazakii levels in SHIME   decreased by . log CFU/mL and increased in SHIME   by . log CFU/mL. Interestingly C. sakazakii levels recovered by  log CFU/mL in SHIME  between days  and  .  
The control treatment showed a reduction of C. sakazakii by . log CFU/mL during the first treatment period similar to that of the LAB treatment administered in SHIME . C. 
sakazakii was reduced by  log CFU/mL after  days after administration of the LAB + VGOS treatment in SHIME  before recovering by . log CFU/mL between  to  days. In the second treatment period C. sakazakii levels were reduced by . log CFU/mL in SHIME . In comparison C. sakazakii was reduced by . log CFU/mL in SHIME  after the LAB + VGOS treatment before increasing by  log CFU/mL whereas C. sakazakii levels in SHIME  which received the LAB treatment did not change significantly throughout the treatment period . 

 
.. Metabolomic profile of infant SHIME 
... Treatment effects on metabolite profiles 
 	Changes in the metabolite concentration were visualized on a heat map and separated into clusters. Metabolites which had similar changes in concentration throughout the treatment period were grouped together into one cluster. Clusters were also numbered based on similarities in the changes in metabolite concentration. For example cluster  in SHIME  contained metabolites with the most similar changes in concentration to cluster  and was least similar to cluster  . The trends in metabolite concentration were similar between SHIME  and  as indicated by the descending order of clusters . However SHIME  clusters were ordered differently than SHIME  and  . The composition of the clusters groups was similar throughout all SHIMEs although succinate and butyrate are in different cluster groups between the SHIME systems.   
 	Principal component analysis  biplot revealed the general relationship between metabolites and treatment periods for each SHIME . The metabolite profile between the first and second treatment periods for SHIME  and  were distinctly different as the majority of the samples within the first treatment period were clustered around quadrants II and 
III whereas the samples for the first treatment are in quadrants I and IV . On the other hand the metabolite profiles in the two treatment periods of SHIME  were quite similar as they primarily clustered within quadrants I II and III . Some metabolite profiles are also mirrored along the second principal component  between SHIME  and  which had the same treatments but in opposite order . For example acetone glycine and ethanol were located in quadrant III for SHIME  whereas they were in quadrant II for SHIME . However other metabolites such as propionate and choline do not follow this trend. Based on these observations PC may differentiate between treatment periods as indicated with SHIME  and  and PC may be a measure of the metabolite concentrations.  
... Association of treatments and metabolites with C. sakazakii  
The PCA biplot combining all SHIMEs and both treatment periods could also give a different perspective on the overall relationship between systems and treatment periods. In the first treatment period the metabolite profiles of SHIME  and  were distinct from SHIME  as indicated by the samples for ST  being primarily located in quadrant III as opposed to samples for ST and ST . The same observation could be made in the second treatment period as ST was distinctly different than ST and ST. The distinct metabolite profiles between treatment periods for SHIME  and  but a similar profile for SHIME  was also observed. Samples from the first treatment period were clustered in the first two quadrants whereas the second treatment period of SHIME  and  were clustered around quadrant IV. In contrast both treatment periods of SHIME  were clustered in quadrant III. The PCA also indicated that the timing of the treatments may have an effect on the metabolite profiles. ST and ST for example were inoculated with the same treatment of LAB in similar concentrations but the metabolite profiles for the two periods were distinct. The samples for ST were clustered around quadrants I and II but ST was clustered in quadrant III. Similarly ST and ST were also distinct being primarily located in quadrant IV and III respectively. When observed throughout the twoweek treatment period however there was no distinct metabolite profile between the control and treatments . 
The PCA could also be used as an indicator of C. sakazakii levels. During the first treatment period for SHIME  and  the change in C. sakazakii levels were similar. In the PCA biplot this was also indicated based on the similar clusters for ST and ST . On the other hand SHIME  had reduced levels of C. sakazakii in the first treatment period as compared to SHIME  and  which was shown by the distinct metabolite profile of ST on the PCA as compared to ST and ST. This observation continued into the second treatment period as samples from SHIME  and  had similar levels of C. sakazakii and similar clusters in the PCA. Although both applications of LAB and VGOS reduced C. sakazakii levels by approximately log CFU/mL regardless of timing the metabolite profiles were distinct as previously mentioned. Based on this PCA and with the exception of ST PC could potentially differentiate between treatments that reduced C. sakazakii levels as compared to the ones that did not.  
 	Based on the previous analyses some metabolites may be correlated with numbers of C. sakazakii which were validated using a regression analysis. Acetate ethanol acetone and glycine concentrations were significantly correlated with C. sakazakii levels . Acetate was negatively correlated with C. sakazakii whereas the other metabolites were positively correlated. All of the other metabolites were not significantly correlated with C. sakazakii levels .  

 
.. Microbial community composition of the infant SHIME 
There were  shared genera within  phyla identified across all SHIME systems. Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes were the dominant phyla in all SHIMEs  and within these phyla Veillonella and Bacteroides were the most abundant organisms accounting for approximately  of the SHIME gut microbiota . The species diversity across the three SHIME systems remained fairly stable regardless of the treatment added. There was a slightly higher species diversity in the first treatment period across all SHIME systems and during the LAB + VGOS treatment regardless of the SHIME system . The first inoculation of the LAB + VGOS treatment into SHIME  also showed a slightly higher species diversity relative to the other SHIMEs and treatment periods . However relative to the other SHIME systems SHIME  had the most diverse microbial community over the twoweek treatment period . Furthermore the presence of C. sakazakii did not alter the microbiota community composition even in the control SHIME in the absence of a treatment .  
Betadiversity metrics  showed significantly different shared taxa during treatment periods . 
Furthermore community abundance was significantly different between SHIME treatments and both SHIME and treatments . Subsetting of the metadata revealed that the difference in community abundance was due to SHIME  across both treatment periods and the LAB + VGOS between treatments .  
  
 
 

.. Inter and intrafeature associations in the infant SHIME 
The relationships between metabolitemetabolite metabolitemicrobe and microbemicrobe pairs between the control and treatments  were assessed using the Spearman’s rank correlation to provide some insight into the C. sakazakii survival metabolomic and gut microbiota trends as previously described in this chapter. In general there were similar positive correlations between formate propionate ethanol methanol and acetate between the treatments and the control . There was a stronger metabolitemetabolite correlation in the LAB + VGOS treatment to the LAB only treatment. In particular there were strong correlations between propionate and acetate formate and methanol  which suggests that these metabolites were part of similar metabolic pathways that may have been strengthened due to the LAB + VGOS treatment. Other trends in metabolitemetabolite correlation between different groups of metabolites were observed to be unique within the LAB + VGOS treatment such as the negative correlation of the SCFAs with other organic acids and the positive correlation between organic acids and ethanol. Between the metabolitemicrobe and microbemicrobe pairs the relative abundance of Bifidobacterium and Cronobacter in the control SHIME was negatively correlated  which may indicate a potential role of Bifidobacterium in controlling Cronobacter in a healthy infant.  
 

. Discussion 
C. sakazakii can pose a significant risk to infants when ingested but the risk of illness may be reduced by ingesting probiotics or synbiotics by inhibiting the growth of C. sakazakii. Here we demonstrated that a potential synbiotic consisting of LAB and VGOS can inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii in an infant SHIME model. Metabolomics and S rRNA gene sequencing showed potential mechanisms of inhibition such as the production of antimicrobial metabolites or possibly through competition for nutrients due to a more diverse microbial community as a result of the potential synbiotic treatment. Interestingly we also observed a reduction of C. sakazakii in the absence of a treatment which could be attributed to the native gut microbiota.  
.. General overview of C. sakazakii survival 
In the infant SHIME C. sakazakii levels decreased by approximately log CFU/mL after both applications of the potential synbiotic treatment and throughout both treatment periods for the control SHIME although there was a more drastic decrease in C. sakazakii levels during the second treatment period . In contrast both applications of the potential probiotic treatment did not seem to have a significant effect on C. sakazakii levels regardless of the SHIME system . Synbiotics can increase Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium levels and were found to be better at inhibiting foodborne pathogens than probiotics . Synbiotics can be better than probiotics at inhibiting foodborne pathogens due to the degradation of the prebiotic substrate by the probiotics or the gut microbiota into metabolites that could have antimicrobial properties .  
The earliest colonizers of the infant gut are LAB and bifidobacteria although the latter is generally more predominant . The numbers of LAB in infant feces range from  log CFU/g  which is in similar quantities to the concentration of LAB  used in the potential probiotic and synbiotic treatments. The LAB used in this study were not tested for acid or bile resistance therefore their independent introduction into the SHIME may have reduced their survival rate as they were exposed to gastric and bile juices and other bacteria. Prebiotics can increase the resistance of probiotics to gastric acid and bile possibly due to a change in the protein production of microorganisms . Inactivated probiotics which include the microbes and/or their components could exert the same mechanisms as the live microbes to confer a health benefit on the host such as modulating the gut microbiota and inhibiting pathogens  but this effect was not observed in this study.    
Probiotics and prebiotics and by extension synbiotics can influence the gut metabolome by modulating the gut microbiota . As a result metabolomics alone or in combination with S rRNA gene sequencing can be used to evaluate changes in host health. In particular shortchain fatty acids  are regarded as some of the most important metabolites produced in the GI tract due to their association with host health . Some of the key functions of SCFA are to serve as energy sources for epithelial cells inhibition of opportunistic pathogens and as modulators of the immune system .  
In this study cluster analysis and PCA revealed that the application of the potential probiotics and synbiotic in an infant SHIME affected the infant gut metabolome in a timedependent manner. The trends in metabolite concentration and overall metabolomic profiles seem to be dependent on whether the potential probiotics were added to the SHIME first or after the inoculation of the potential synbiotic. Probiotics can influence the levels of SCFA and other metabolites but the effects might be dependent on the individual . Previous studies have also reported that metabolomic profiles are more stable than microbiota profiles  which may indicate that the beneficial effects of probiotics may not be revealed solely by metabolomics analyses. Infant diet which includes prebiotics and breast milk can alter the metabolomic profile of infants by shifting the composition of their gut microbiota . A synbiotic consisting of Lactobacillus paracasei with GOS was found to increase the growth of lactobacilli and bifidobacteria which subsequently increased the concentration of acetate in gnotobiotic mice inoculated with infant microbiota as compared to the control . Synbiotic supplementation can also positively impact the gut metabolic activities as indicated by an increase in levels of SCFA ketones carbon disulfide and methyl acetate . The application of the potential probiotics or synbiotic influenced the changes in metabolite concentration and profile between the SHIMEs . It is worthwhile to note that even in healthy breastfed infants the metabolic profiles between infants can vary  although this may be partially due to limitations in the studies’ methodologies and analyses .  
Organic acids and bacteriocins are produced by probiotics and synbiotics that can inhibit the growth of pathogens . In the infant 
SHIME the pH is controlled to be between .. and .. for the PC and DC vessels respectively which may have an effect on the ability of the organic acids to inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii. The pKa value of an acid is an indicator of its strength and reactivity. Acids with a lower pKa value are considered to be a stronger acid . Likotrafiti et al.  showed that the combination of B. longum or L. fermentum  and various prebiotics inhibited the growth of E. coli O:H and E. coli O when the pH of the culture  was lower than the organic acids’ pKa values ranging between ... On the other hand inhibition was not observed using a combination of B. longum and VGOS but the potential synbiotic extended the lag phase of both E. coli strains tested . The authors noted that the difference in pH of the in media with B. longum containing either glucose or VGOS was a factor in whether the pathogens’ growth was delayed or inhibited. Weak acids like organic acids can enter a bacterial cell through the cell membrane and acidify the cytoplasm which in turn can damage enzymes and cell structures . Furthermore organic acids can play a role in stabilizing the microbial population in the gut and stimulating the growth of commensal bacteria  which could inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii through competition for nutrients. Bacteriocins unlike organic acids are polypeptides produced by bacteria during ribosomal synthesis and can also have antimicrobial properties . Some LAB used in this study e.g. L. paracasei and P. acidilactici have been shown to produce bacteriocins  but the particular strains used in this study have not been tested for bacteriocin production. Furthermore due to the lack of an outer membrane bacteriocins are more effective against Grampositive bacteria than Gramnegative bacteria  so they are unlikely to have been the causative factor that inhibited C. sakazakii.  
Previous studies have shown that hydrogen peroxide  is produced by LAB and can inhibit the growth of foodborne pathogens through oxidative stress . In the anaerobic conditions of the gut and the infant SHIME the concentration of HO may not be enough to inhibit the growth of pathogens . Additionally sublethal concentration of HO can increase the resistance of foodborne pathogens and their progeny  however whether this occurs in the SHIME ecosystem is unclear.  
An alternative mechanism by which probiotics and synbiotics inhibit foodborne pathogens is by competing for limited nutrients in the environment which suggests that beneficial bacteria in the gut can use nutrients that would otherwise be used by opportunistic pathogens thereby limiting their growth . There are more nutrients available in the proximal colon as compared to the distal colon due to its proximity to the stomach and small intestine so increasing the levels of beneficial bacteria in the proximal colon can decrease nutrient availability for pathogens . Wilson and Perini  found that fecal bacteria used glucose and other nutrients more efficiently than C. difficile which reduced its growth as compared to the control without fecal bacteria. Furthermore even bacteria within the same genera may compete for nutrients with opportunistic pathogens as they have similar metabolic requirements . In contrast depleted gut microbiota as a result of antibiotic treatment can lead to an increase in the amount of nutrients in the gut environment which can cause the proliferation of S. Typhimurium and C. difficile . Similarly Gillis et al.  found that dysbiosis can cause the host metabolism to undergo lactate fermentation which in turn facilitates the growth of Salmonella.  
.. Association between metabolomics and C. sakazakii in the infant SHIME 
The PCA biplot and regression analyses gave insight into possible factors that could inhibit C. sakazakii. The PCA biplot reduces the data dimensionality of the metabolomics data into two synthetic variables known as the principal components. The objective of PCA is to identify the relationships between different groups such as metabolites and samples. Untargeted metabolomics and PCA have been used to screen for potential bioactive molecules from plants and evaluate the metabolic changes of foodborne pathogens postexposure to biochemical or physical treatments . In this study the PCA combining all SHIMEs across both treatment periods revealed differences in metabolite profile within the SHIME systems that may be linked to C. sakazakii levels . The second principal component seems to differentiate between C. sakazakii levels as treatments were clustered within the same spatial area depending on whether the treatment period did or did not reduce the levels of C. sakazakii. The exception for these observations would be the second treatment period of SHIME  that received the LAB treatment and which had a similar metabolite profile as the first treatment. Additionally there was no observed difference in metabolite profiles when comparing between the treatments and the control as a whole. Maifiah et al.  used PCA to identify changes and similarities in the metabolite profile of Acinetobacter baumanii after antibiotic treatment at different timepoints. Additionally Tian et al.  used PCA to identify changes in the metabolomic response of E. coli after exposure to ohmic heating. This study found that some metabolites such as valine alcohols acetate and other organic acids are generally associated with lower levels of C. sakazakii . However it is important to note that although PCA can give a general overview of relationships between metabolites and samples univariate analysis should be used to better identify correlations between C. sakazakii and metabolite concentrations.   
Regression analysis of the profiled metabolites revealed that acetate ethanol acetone and glycine were significantly correlated with C. sakazakii levels . From these metabolites only acetate was negatively correlated with C. sakazakii. Acetone is commonly used as a medium to extract potential antimicrobial compounds from plants  fungi  and bacteria . However as this metabolite alone has not been studied to inhibit foodborne pathogens its significant correlation may be due to interactions with other compounds in the SHIME. Additionally acetone may be positively correlated albeit weakly with C. sakazakii due to biodegradation. Helicobacter pylori was found to metabolize acetone into acetoacetate due to the presence of acetone carboxylase which in turn is converted into acetylCoA as a source of energy and improves survival in the stomach . However the existence of acetone carboxylase in foodborne pathogens is unclear and is mainly associated with soil bacteria . Glycine is an amino acid that functions as an intestinal microbiota regulator . The glycine cleavage system has been reported to be an important part of the pathogenesis of Francisella tularensis an intracellular pathogen that affects the lung liver spleen and blood . However as with acetone the role of glycine and its association with the survival of foodborne pathogens in the GI tract has not been studied. Despite the statistical correlation between the concentrations of glycine and acetone with C. sakazakii levels these compounds are the result of bacterial metabolism  and may not have a significant biological effect on the growth of C. sakazakii.     
Ethanol is used as a disinfectant against foodborne pathogens on various surfaces . Ethanol acts as an antimicrobial agent by increasing the membrane permeability of foodborne pathogens thus causing cell lysis . In this study however ethanol was not shown to have a negative correlation with C. sakazakii levels. In the SHIME model the concentration of ethanol may be insufficient to inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii as the pathogen has been shown to adapt to  ethanol for  h which subsequently can improve its survival in  ethanol for  h . Furthermore adaptation to a sublethal ethanol concentration can increase pathogen tolerance to oxidative and acid stress . Ethanol tolerance is reported to be correlated with the presence of outer membrane proteins and the rpoS gene . Crossprotection of foodborne pathogens against ethanol and acid may be due to some genes such as rpoS and 
SENA in Salmonella Enteritidis which have similar roles in both stress responses . C. sakazakii can synthesize catalase to break down ethanol  which may also mitigate the antimicrobial properties of ethanol.  
Acetate in addition to propionate and butyrate has been reported to reduce the growth and pathogenicity of foodborne pathogens . In this study however acetate was only shown to be a significant factor in reducing the levels of C. sakazakii. Zhang et al.  reported that a lower environmental pH  was able to inhibit the growth of E. coli in broth media whereas a neutral pH stimulated its growth. This observation could be due to the lower environmental pH allowing SCFAs and other organic acids to permeate bacterial cells and acidify the cytoplasm . Foodborne pathogens including C. sakazakii can develop acid resistance when exposed to sublethal concentrations of acetate although the adaptation is influenced by the acid concentration and the pH of the environment . E. coli can adapt to the acid stress induced by SCFAs at a neutral pH by regulating the expression of rpoS . Changes in protein synthesis have been linked to an increase in resistance to salt and acid  in S. Typhimurium after exposure to a  mM SCFA mixture  however the concentration of SCFA used by Kwon et al.  exceeded the concentration reported in our study. Similarly C. sakazakii strains with high catalase activity and low rpoS expression can use acetate as a growth substrate in a nutrient deprived environment . The robust metabolism of C. sakazakii in addition to the complex gut microbiota and metabolome could indicate why despite previous studies demonstrating the potent antimicrobial properties of acetate there was a weak correlation between acetate concentration and C. sakazakii levels.  
As with the other main SCFAs propionate and butyrate have been reported to inhibit the growth of foodborne pathogens despite these metabolites not being significantly correlated with the inhibition of C. sakazakii in this study. Butyrate has been noted to have the most consistent antimicrobial activity among the SCFAs . Additionally propionate was also found to be better than acetate at inhibiting the growth of C. sakazakii although it is not an acceptable additive in powdered infant formula . The minimum inhibitory concentration  of butyrate and propionate against S. enterica strains on culture media was found to be approximately  µg/mL or around  mM on average  but these concentrations exceed the SCFA levels generated in the infant SHIME. Both breastfed and formulafed infants lack the predominant butyrateproducing bacteria such as Eubacterium rectacle and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii until approximately  months of age . Although the concentration of propionate and butyrate in the SHIME may not directly contribute to the inhibition of C. sakazakii the combination of SCFAs in the colon environment may have a synergistic effect in inhibiting the growth of foodborne pathogens . On the other hand SCFA at sublethal concentrations may also be used by foodborne pathogens as a carbon source thereby stimulating their growth . Although it is recognized that SCFAs have some role in inhibiting the growth of foodborne pathogens it is important to consider that their efficacy depends on various factors including environmental pH concentration and other bacterial strains and metabolites.  
.. Community composition of the infant SHIME microbiota 
The infant SHIME microbiota was dominated by Veillonella and Bacteroides which is in contrast to the commonly reported genera of a breastfed infant which includes Bifidobacterium Staphylococcus Streptococcus and Lactobacillus . Although as previously mentioned the composition of the infant gut microbiota can indeed vary depending on various factors including diet environment and delivery method in this study the SHIME microbiota composition may have been influenced by the basal feed used in the SHIME system. Bacteroides Veillonella and Lachnoclostridium which represent some of the most abundant genera in the SHIME systems from our study can degrade mucin a main component of the infant SHIME feed to produce SCFAs . The ability of Veillonella to degrade mucin may also be a reason for its high abundance  in all SHIME systems which indicates that Veillonella can potentially outcompete other microorganisms within the SHIME systems. Furthermore Veillonella spp. uses the methylmalonylCoA pathway to use succinate and lactate to produce propionate and lactate which could be a factor in the fluctuations in concentration of succinate and lactate   
Alpha and betadiversity indices were used to assess the stability of the SHIME microbiota once the C. sakazakii cocktail with and without the potential probiotic  and synbiotic  treatments had been introduced. The results showed that the first addition of the LAB 
+ VGOS slightly increased the species diversity of SHIME  as compared to the control and LAB  which may be a factor in the decline of C. sakazakii in both treatment periods . The gut microbiota can compete with pathogenic bacteria for nutrients thereby limiting growth  and it is possible that a more diverse environment can contain other bacteria which use the same nutrients as C. sakazakii. The production of metabolites as a result of a higher species diversity after the LAB + VGOS treatment may be due to the prebiotic substrate as an additional nutrient source that can be metabolized into antimicrobial metabolites . In fact the reduction in levels of C. sakazakii in the control and LAB + VGOS treatments may be a result of multiple factors.  
To the best of the author’s knowledge the impact of the infant gut microbiota upon ingesting C. sakazakii has not been documented. In this study the results suggest that the presence of C. sakazakii at  log CFU/mL a concentration much higher than found in contaminated foods and in the environment did not affect the diversity of the infant SHIME microbiota . 
While some studies have shown that the presence of a foodborne pathogen can alter the gut microbiota in in vitro gut and animal models  others have highlighted the robustness of the human gut microbiota. Zhang et al.  described a “liketolike rule” for the human gut microbiota which suggests that the native gut microbiota resists change to extraneous bacteria such as foodborne pathogens and beneficial bacteria that are ingested. The authors noted that a gut microbiota with a high abundance of native Enterobacteriaceae which can include opportunistic pathogens like Salmonella and Cronobacter spp. can provide more favorable conditions for foodborne pathogens to grow. Conversely another study by Stecher et al.  found that Lactobacillus reuteri more effectively colonized a mouse microbiota containing a high abundance of lactobacilli as compared to the ones with a lower abundance.  
Despite previous studies reporting the efficacy of LAB to inhibit the growth of foodborne pathogens or the ability of probiotics to modulate the gut microbiota to exert a protective effect on the host  this study demonstrated the opposite. Species diversity and community abundance were similar between the LAB only treatment and the control . Additionally the metabolomic profiles of the SHIME suggest that the LAB treatment did not affect the SHIME metabolome. This may be due to the robustness of the microbiota as previously mentioned where the lack of Lactobacillus and Pediococcus present in the SHIME prior to the treatment period resulted in poor colonization and/or adherence of the LAB. However the frequency of the LAB treatment should also be considered. Ren et al.  found that the addition of a mixed LAB culture can not only prevent Staphyloccocus aureus infection but also maintain the gut microbiota in a mouse model. A key difference that may have minimized the efficacy of the LAB used in this study is the dosage or frequency of the LAB treatment. The study by Ren et al.  used multiple feedings of the LAB throughout their experiment whereas in this study the LAB was only introduced once. The onetime inoculation of the LAB may not have been sufficient to exhibit inhibitory effects on C. sakazakii which would support the notion that probiotics should be ingested in adequate amounts to exert a health benefit 
.     
.. Potential interactions in the SHIME microbiota and metabolome 
Despite the controlled environment of the SHIME system the results suggest that there is a vast network of interactions between and within the gut microbiota and metabolome. In this study the associations between select metabolites and microbial genera were evaluated using a Spearman’s rank correlation and visualized on a heat map to provide insight into the reasons by which C. sakazakii levels decreased with and without any intervention. While the correlation matrix does not explicitly demonstrate the metabolic pathways within the infant SHIME it does provide a statistical representation of several major interactions within the system based on the available data.  
The correlation matrix of the control SHIME revealed a strong negative correlation between Cronobacter and Bifidobacterium spp.  which is interesting as 
Bifidobacterium has been previously reported to inhibit the growth of enteropathogens . Infants that are premature or lowbirthweight may be more susceptible to C. sakazakii infection as they may be missing some beneficial gut microbiota including Bacteroides and Bifidobacterium . Therefore the findings of this study suggest that the presence of Bifidobacterium spp. could play a role in controlling C. sakazakii in a healthy infant gut. A possible mechanism of inhibition involves the production of organic acids such as acetate lactate and formate which have a strong antagonistic effect against Gramnegative bacteria . Ethanol in addition to the organic acids can also be produced by 
Bifidobacterium by metabolizing carbohydrates and mucin through the bifid shunt pathway 
. Bifidobacterium and other commensal gut microbiota can compete for nutrients with foodborne pathogens  which would further limit the ability for C. sakazakii to grow within the SHIME system. Despite the relatively low abundance of some gut microbiota these results provide further evidence that they can play a significant biological role through synergistic interactions with other microorganisms .  
The Spearman’s rank correlation of the treatments revealed a stronger metabolitemetabolite relationship in the LAB + VGOS treatment as compared to the LAB only. The correlation matrix of the LAB + VGOS showed more defined metabolitemetabolite clusters i.e. groups of blue indicating positive correlations or red for negative correlations and the significant associations between some metabolites such as propionateacetate and propionateformate . These patterns of correlations between metabolites and significant interactions are less evident within the LAB only treatment . These results provide further evidence that the reduction of C. sakazakii as a result of the LAB + VGOS treatment may be metabolitedependent since the regression analysis of the profiled metabolites showed a significant but weak correlation between acetate and C. sakazakii . The most abundant bacteria in the SHIME namely Bacteroides and Veillonella could produce acetate and other metabolites by metabolizing Vivinal GOS through similar metabolic pathways . It is important to note however that other SHIME microbiota could play a role in the complex metabolomemicrobiota network by creating intermediary metabolites e.g. formate succinate and lactate which are later converted into SCFAs . For example Hinton Jr and Hume  found that a synergistic interaction between Veillonella lactate and succinate could inhibit the growth of S. Typhimurium and S. Enteritidis through the production of volatile fatty acids and a reduction of pH in broth media. Other studies on the effects of prebiotics on the gut metabolome and microbiota typically include consistent consumption of the prebiotic lasting multiple weeks however this SHIME experiment lasted two weeks separated by oneweek intervals with only one addition of the VGOS. In such cases Tang et al.  found that shortterm diets had a stronger effect on the gut metabolome as recently consumed nutrients are quickly metabolized by the gut microbiota without influencing the microbial composition.   
. Conclusion 
To the best of our knowledge this study is the first to evaluate the survival of a foodborne pathogen by using an in vitro gut model to mimic an infant’s colonic conditions. Altogether our results suggest that C. sakazakii can be inhibited in the colon of healthy infants through competition for nutrients production of antimicrobial compounds or a combination of 
mechanisms. In a healthy infant it is possible that the presence of C. sakazakii is selflimiting due to the native gut microbiota. However ingesting a treatment could reduce the levels of C. sakazakii due to the production of metabolites such as SCFAs. Furthermore we provide evidence regarding the robustness of the infant gut microbiota albeit within a controlled environment simulating the colonic conditions of an infant and for the potential biological significance of some microbial genera present in relatively low abundance in the gut. Overall our study demonstrates that a potential synbiotic or probiotic may not be necessary for a healthy infant but can accelerate the inhibition of C. sakazakii if ingested.   
 	 

 Chapter  – Limitations future work and final remarks 
This exploratory study focused on the bacteriostatic properties of a potential probiotic or synbiotic treatment against C. sakazakii based on bioinformatics and culturebased methods. While the results of this study give further insight into the ability of synbiotics to reduce the risk of C. sakazakii there are a number of limitations that will be discussed in this section. This section also gives direction for future research to better characterize the mechanisms by which probiotics and synbiotics and alternative preventative measures can help mitigate the risk of foodborne illness in all demographics. 
. 	Limitations 
The LAB strains used in the preliminary and SHIME experiments were from the CRIFS collection and have not been fully characterized for their probiotic properties such as tolerance to 
GI conditions i.e. gastric and bile juices and ability to adhere to the intestinal epithelium 
. The exception to this would be L. plantarum ATCC  which has been recently characterized for its probiotic properties . L. plantarum ATCC  was also found to be compatible with FOS in a synbiotic to reduce the risk of sepsis in infants .  
The efficacy of the singlestrain LAB in inhibiting C. sakazakii based on the drop plate assay may not accurately reflect its inhibitory potential as a multistrain cocktail in the SHIME. Previous studies have shown that multistrain probiotics can act synergistically to inhibit the growth of Candida albicans E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus . On the other hand L. rhamnosus GG as a singlestrain probiotic was more effective at reducing the risk of NEC as compared to a multistrain probiotic mixture consisting of 
Bifidobacterium lactis strains . Additionally Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis 
DPPMA and Pediococcus pentosaceus XA were inhibited when cocultivated with Lactobacillus plantarum DC as compared to monocultures possibly due to stress conditions created by the production of the pheromone PlnA by L. plantarum DC  which suggests that the efficacy of a multistrain probiotic mixture could be less effective than a single probiotic due to the growth inhibition of the probiotics. The efficacy of single or multistrain probiotics in inhibiting pathogens may also depend on the method used. Fijan et al.  found that multistrain probiotics were more effective than singlestrain at inhibiting E. coli using an agarspot test whereas the coculturing method gave the opposite results. A coculturing method would be useful to study the potential mechanisms of inhibition as the liquid media can be manipulated to neutralize acid bacteriocins or HO. In general the inoculum density and growth kinetics should be considered when screening the inhibitory properties of probiotics as they can impact the outcome of different methods .  
Although the LABs used in this study did not inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii other combinations of strains may have more success as there are many different strains of probiotics spanning multiple genera. For example Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus GG  and B. lactis 
BB have been reported to improve the health of infants . Similarly the composition of synbiotics can vary widely as there are other prebiotic substrates e.g. FOS and polydextrose and probiotic strain combinations to explore 
.  
The C. sakazakii strains used in the SHIME were isolated from different food clinical or environmental sources which can impact their survival in the SHIME as this study was not able to distinguish between the survival of each strain. Environmental C. sakazakii strains were found to be more tolerant of desiccation but more susceptible to thermal treatment as compared to clinical strains . Additionally as there are some similarities between environmental stresses in food processing and the GI tract foodborne pathogens may be better adapted to the gut conditions if they are isolated from food which has been exposed to sublethal processing or preservation treatments .  
The infant SHIME focused on the luminal portion of the colon but the mucosal environment of the colon may be able to better simulate the colonization of pathogens probiotics and the commensal gut bacteria . Furthermore the SHIME does not have an absorption unit which allows SCFA to accumulate in the distal colon and therefore may not accurately reflect in vivo concentrations immune system and maternal antibodies . Physical constraints also exist when one uses the triple SHIME. For example the control used in this study was inoculated with only C. sakazakii in the first treatment period and sterile MRS media in the second treatment period. In order to evaluate the natural changes in community composition within the infant SHIME it would have been interesting to conduct a SHIME trial that was not inoculated with C. sakazakii or the treatments. Additionally as the start of the second treatment period occurred only a week after the start of the first treatment period there may not have been sufficient time for the gut microbiota and metabolome to stabilize . The effects of the first treatment period on the gut microbiota and metabolome could have lingered and subsequently affected the efficacy of the second treatments. 
Overall this continuous SHIME experiment gives insight into the shortterm effects of different treatment combinations on the survival of C. sakazakii in the infant gut.   
The analysis for the SHIME community  rely on the relative abundance of the various microbes present in the SHIME at the time of sampling. A key limitation to relative abundances is that the data is qualitative and compositional. In other words the abundance of the classified microbes which are supposedly a representation of the community within an ecosystem must add up to . While this type of data is indeed useful to visualize general trends of bacterial populations by ordination  it does not represent the true abundance of a particular taxa within the ecosystem . Various computational methods have been developed or improved upon to minimize the systemic bias of classifying taxa based on relative abundance such as synthetic DNA spikes rarefying scaling and different normalization methods but nevertheless they also introduce biases . Additionally the bioinformatic pipeline used to transform the raw sequencing data from a platform to biologically useful data has its own strengths and weaknesses  further adding to the variance in analyzing S rRNA gene sequencing data. Alternative approaches to quantifying microbial loads measure absolute abundances through digital or quantitative PCR which provide a more comprehensive look into the microbial composition if the appropriate statistical tests are used .   
. 	Future work 
The focus of this study was on the bacteriostatic efficacy of a potential probiotic and synbiotic mixture however probiotics and synbiotics can exert antagonistic effects on foodborne pathogens in other ways. For example probiotics have been reported to reduce the virulence of enteric pathogens in a strainspecific manner . Additionally probiotics and synbiotics can have beneficial effects on the intestinal epithelial cells by mitigating the adhesion of pathogens and promoting tight junction integrity . Several factors including the timing and dosage of probiotics and synbiotics should be considered when evaluating their beneficial effects on the host. The inconsistencies in methodology and reporting of the health benefits of probiotics prebiotics and synbiotics in addition to the wide selections of probiotics available including Bifidobacteria are a challenge in determining their optimal applications in infants . The treatments used in this study were also directly applied to the colon in the absence of a food matrix. Future experiments should also investigate the ability of probiotics and synbiotics to inhibit foodborne pathogens within a food matrix such as PIF and the infant stomach/small intestine conditions.  
Recent trends in food microbiology have placed greater emphasis on the use of a multi omics approach to improve global food safety . The relationship between pathogens and the gut microbiome is a complex but fascinating area of investigation that greatly benefit from bioinformatics to better understand the intricate interactions between the groups. Previous studies have used metabolomics as a detection method for foodborne pathogens and as a means to understand how diseases affect the host microbiome and metabolome . Bioinformatic analyses of metabolomics and genomics can even be expanded to create predictive models that can improve food safety  and gut health 
.   
 As mentioned the SHIME used in the present work was focused on the luminal environment of the colon which may not accurately reflect the colonic conditions in vivo. Furthermore the SHIME used was adapted to try and mimic the colon of a healthy infant. The MSHIME can more closely mimic the colon in vivo by incorporating a mucosal environment. Liu et al.  demonstrated differences in microbial communities in a mucosal as compared to a luminal environment. Lambrecht et al.  showed that their E. coli of interest was . log CFU/mL higher in the lumen as compared to the mucosa of the SHIME vessels. MSHIME would also be useful to evaluate the ability of probiotic strains to adhere to the mucosa and exert the aforementioned health benefits on the intestinal epithelium . The efficacy of probiotics prebiotics and synbiotics can also be used on other demographic situations. For example it would be interesting to compare the differences in C. sakazakii levels between a sick and healthy infant SHIME after treatment with probiotics and synbiotics. 
 SHIME and other gut models typically involve evaluating the bacterial composition but the gut environment contains other microbes that could play a role in regulating host health. Viruses in the GI tract have gained the attention of researchers but there is very limited research regarding their role on the health of infants. It is interesting however that the abundance and diversity of viruses in the infant GI tract are affected by age and diet .  
 The idea to use probiotics and synbiotics stemmed from the need to provide alternative control measures to inhibit C. sakazakii in the infant GI tract or in a food matrix thus minimizing the risk of infection. However it should be noted that other alternative control measures are being studied. For example C. sakazakii bacteriophages have been isolated and characterized to be used as a biocontrol in dairy products . Similarly thermostatic radio frequency  and cold atmospheric plasma  may help to inactivate any cells of C. sakazakii that are present in PIF. One method may not be sufficient to eliminate C. sakazakii instead it may be more useful to use a multihurdle approach e.g. probiotics in the GI tract and phages in the PIF facilities as some methods may be more practical depending on the situation.  
. 	 




2 
 

1 
 



 
 





4 
 

4 
 



4 
 







4 
 



4 
 





4 
 

4 
 



4 
 





4 
 

4 
 



4 
 





7 
 

7 
 



7 
 

















4 
 

4 
 



4 
 





4 
 

4 
 



4 
 

