 
 
 
 
Listeria monocytogenes is an opportunistic foodborne pathogen which has been implicated in many outbreaks of foodborne diseases. The thesis examined the survival of L. monocytogenes under acid and chlorine stresses which it encounters inside the host or in the food processing environment respectively. The Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial System  was used to simulate the gastric conditions of human adults. The survival rates of L. monocytogenes inoculated in filtered milk products after a hour exposure to simulated gastric fluid with pH values of . . and . were . to . . to . and . to . respectively. The survival of L. monocytogenes depended on a combination of factors including gastric acidity gastric digestion time L. monocytogenes strain food type and recovery method. The exposure of L. monocytogenes to . ppm chlorine induced the cells to enter the viable but nonculturable state . The cells in the VBNC state showed signs of resuscitation and growth after  hours of incubation in filtered milk products at . 

 Chapter  Introduction 
Illness caused by foodborne pathogens continue to remain a public health problem causing considerable social and economic impacts to healthcare systems worldwide. According to the World Health Organization consuming contaminated food can cause  million illnesses and  deaths annually . It is estimated that  in  Canadians come down with foodborne illness every year . Among the top five pathogens causing foodborne illness  Listeria monocytogenes is the leading cause of death from total domestic foodborne illness in Canada . 
As one of the major threats to food safety L. monocytogenes causes a rare but serious disease listeriosis with a casefatality  rate of  around  –  in highrisk groups such as pregnant women neonates the elderly and immunocompromised individuals . Among readytoeat  products deli meats and hot dogs were commonly associated with reported listeriosis outbreaks in the s; however more recently the outbreaks are often linked to dairy products and produce .  
 The main route of acquiring listeriosis is through the ingestion of contaminated foods. Therefore understanding how bacteria respond to the defense mechanisms inside of the host such as acid stress in the human stomach is critical for studying bacterial infections and for developing potential prevention strategies for listeriosis. In this study a human gut simulator Human 
Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem  was used to mimic the gastric conditions of adults. This research provides relevant information to develop predictive human gastric models for the survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine milk under specific conditions such as examining  survival under different gastric acidities;  the influence of L. monocytogenes strain variation and  if the fat content of bovine milk can influence survival.  
Viable but nonculturable  cells have been extensively studied over the past decade . The presence of VBNC cells in food may pose a health risk to the public since the viable bacteria cannot be detected using conventional culturebased plating methods which are commonly used in the food industry for microbial safety testing. Bacteria may be avirulent after entering the VBNC state  but they may be capable of causing infections in the hosts after resuscitation . It is welldocumented that L. monocytogenes can enter the VBNC state under stressed conditions such as starvation desiccation and in the presence of salt disinfectant acids or food preservatives .  
L. monocytogenes outbreaks linked to raw milk or products that are made from unpasteurized milk have significantly decreased over the past decades due to the introduction of onfarm food safety programs and better efforts by industry to prevent crosscontamination in dairy processing facilities . However there have been listeriosis cases associated with pasteurized milk due to postpasteurization contamination . It is possible that these cases could have been due to environmental VBNC cells of L. monocytogenes that resuscitated during storage of the milk. Therefore it would be interesting to identify any postpasteurization conditions which may be able to induce the formation of the VBNC state and others which may help to resuscitate L. monocytogenes in the dairy processing plant environment. It can potentially help to minizine the risk of releasing contaminated product into the market and ultimately prevent dairyassociated cases of listeriosis from occurring.  
 
 
. Research Hypotheses and Objectives 
 
Hypotheses: 
 
We hypothesize that: 
The survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine filtered milk under simulated gastric conditions of an adult will depend on the strain of L. monocytogenes examined the milk fat content in which the strains are suspended and the gastric acidity and digestion time of adults. 
Chlorine which is a common disinfectant used in the dairy plants can induce L. monocytogenes to enter a VBNC state and that VBNC cells can resuscitate during storage in bovine filtered milk.  
 
Main research objectives:  
 
To evaluate the effects of L. monocytogenes strain and gastric acidity and emptying time of the adult on the survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine filtered milk in a simulation of the stomach of human adults 
To evaluate whether milk fat content can affect the survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine filtered milk in a simulation of the adult stomach 
To determine whether L. monocytogenes can enter the VBNC state in bovine filtered milk during the simulated human gastric exposure  
To determine whether chorine can induce wildtype L. monocytogenes to enter the VBNC state 
To evaluate whether VBNC cells can resuscitate during storage in bovine filtered milk 
 
 
 
 
Chapter   Literature Review  
. Listeria monocytogenes  
.. Listeria species  
The genus Listeria belongs to the phylum Firmicutes and is closely related to Bacillus 
Clostridium Enterococcus Streptococcus and Staphylococcus . Listeria species are rodshaped Grampositive bacteria. As of  there are  species of Listeria that have been identified; these species are classified into two clades: Listeria sensu stricto and 
Listeria sensu lato as shown in Table . . The species from sensu stricto clade include Listeria monocytogenes and Listeria ivanovii and four other species which are commonly found in the feces and gastrointestinal  tract of mammalian hosts while the sensu lato species have been isolated from the environment or foodcontact surfaces .  
Two species from the Listeria genus are pathogenic L. monocytogenes and L. ivanovii . L. monocytogenes mainly infects humans and animals whereas L. ivanovii is mainly associated with diseases in ruminants but has caused a few cases in humans. Listeria species are ubiquitous in nature and they can be found in soil stream water sewage plant and food. The presence of Listeria species in food should be prevented since the ingestion of pathogenic species such as L. monocytogenes can cause mild GI symptoms but also rare but serious invasive infections  . 
.. Microbiology of L. monocytogenes  
L. monocytogenes is a nonspore former facultative anaerobe and plant saprophyte which is widely distributed in nature .This welladapted organism can grow and survive under a wide range of conditions. L. monocytogenes is a psychrotropic organism adapted to grow at low temperatures  but its optimal growth temperature range is between  to  . L. monocytogenes also demonstrates flagellar mobility at temperatures less or equal than  ?C and are typically nonmotile at temperatures equal or greater than ?C . It is ?hemolysis positive catalase positive and oxidase negative . In addition L. monocytogenes is able to survive and grow under high salt concentrations   and between pH . to . . The ability of L. monocytogenes to adapt to acidic environments is of particular interest since it encounters such an environment during its passage through the stomach intestine and in the macrophage phagosome of the host .  
 
Historically serotyping has been one of the most widely accepted subtyping methods for L. monocytogenes which is based on the combinations of the flagellar  and somatic  antigenic factors. As of   serotypes have been described for L. monocytogenes: /a /b 
/c a b c a ab b c d e h and  . More than  of the strains isolated from food and patients belong to serotypes /a /b /c and b . Among these four serotypes /a /b and b are responsible for a vast majority of human listeriosis cases . L. monocytogenes strains can also be categorized into four evolutionary lineages based on phylogeny and ecology . Most of the human strains belong to lineage I or II including serovar /a from lineage I and serovars /b and b from lineage II . 
.. The impact of L. monocytogenes in food safety 
L. monocytogenes is a major threat to food safety as it causes listeriosis with a high casefatality rate in highrisk groups including pregnant women neonates the elderly as well as immunocompromised individuals . L. monocytogenes is commonly found in readytoeat  foods such as dairy meat seafood and fresh produce . The long incubation period of the infection  and the presence of L. monocytogenes in a variety of foods can make the detection of listeriosis outbreaks and the contaminated food source extremely challenging . 
L. monocytogenes infection causes relatively large disease and economic burdens to both public health services and the food industry. Based on a global burden of foodborne diseases  published  by World Health Organization in  listeriosis resulted in more than  illness 
 deaths and  disabilityadjusted lifeyears  . Compared with other foodborne pathogens L. monocytogenes caused fewer infections than nontyphoidal salmonella Salmonella Typhi or Toxoplasma gondii and fewer deaths than Salmonella Typhi . However L. monocytogenes infection is the leading cause of death from the total domestic foodborne illnesses in Canada and the third leading cause in the U.S. 
.  
Among the global polices of L. monocytogenes in RTE foods the U.S. is the only country which has a “zerotolerance” policy absence in a  g sample in place which was established in the early s using detection methods approved by U.S Food and Drug Administration . The government continues to emphasize this policy approach since the latest doseresponse model and outbreaks indicated that a low dose of L. monocytogenes may affect at risk groups negatively if the strains are highly virulent . Other countries e.g. Canada countries in the European Union China and Australia have developed policies based on International Codex Alimentarius Commission standards which are based on setting different microbial limits for foods that do and do not support the growth of L. monocytogenes . 
In Canada RTE foods are defined as “foods not requiring any future preparation before consumption except perhaps washing/rinsing thawing or warming” with some exceptions  . RTE foods are classified based on the product’s ability to support the growth of L. monocytogenes and its intended consumers. Category  RTE foods e.g. delimeats and chicken wraps include all foods that:  L. monocytogenes can grow throughout the stated shelflife and  targeted for highrisk populations such as the elderly pregnant women or immunocompromised individuals . These foods receive the highest priority of industry control. Health Canada has been established the “zerotolerance” policy  for Category  foods. A public alert or food recall may be issued if L. monocytogenes is detected . Commercial pasteurized bovine milk for example is considered as a category  food as L. monocytogenes is able to survive and grow in milk at refrigeration temperature .  
Category A RTE foods e.g. coldsmoked salmon freshcut produce have limited potential for L. monocytogenes to grow throughout the stated shelf life and action is required if the bacterial account   CFU/g  . Category B RTE foods do not support the growth of L. monocytogenes  and may trigger an action if the bacterial account   CFU/g  . Although category B foods receive a lower priority of the industry control for surveillance as compared to foods from category  and A category B foods e.g. ice cream and frozen vegetables have been linked with L. monocytogenes contamination .  
.. L. monocytogenes infection – Listeriosis 
L. monocytogenes causes two main types of infection noninvasive and invasive listeriosis . A majority of healthy people experience noninvasive listeriosis  which has a relatively short incubation period of a few days and causes a mild febrile illness that manifests symptoms such as diarrhea fever headache and myalgia . Noninvasive listeriosis is usually selflimiting and requires no treatment in healthy individuals .  
 Invasive listeriosis mainly affects certain highrisk groups of the population such as pregnant women neonates the elderly as well as immunocompromised individuals . It is characterized by a high casefatality rate  long incubation period  and severe symptoms ; clinical manifestations include meningitis encephalitis pneumonia endocarditis etc. . Antibiotics are the primary treatment of choice for human invasive listeriosis 
. 
The acquisition of listeriosis is mainly due to the ingestion of contaminated food which is a major route of exposure to L. monocytogenes . In the human GI tract there are a variety of defense mechanisms that prevent L. monocytogenes from growth epithelial penetration and systematic dissemination. Upon ingesting L. monocytogenes contaminated food the pathogen is exposed to the first hurdle the extremely low pH gastric fluid which is secreted by stomach cells to digest food . A fraction of the L. monocytogenes population could survive the low pH environment and migrate to the small intestine where it needs to be able to survive osmotic stress high salt concentrations and intestinal peristalsis movement . In addition L. monocytogenes also needs to overcome the protection from the gut microbiota physical barriers and host immune defenses in order to enter the phagocytic cells of the host and be carried around in the blood to different organs thus establishing infection .  
 
. Stress response in L. monocytogenes  
Mechanisms for responding to environmental changes are universally present in living beings. The environmental stresses could come from the host  or outside the host . Similar to other bacteria L. monocytogenes also uses different stresscoping strategies to survive under harsh environmental conditions by improving the resistance to stress in the current physiological state or transitioning to a different state e.g. the dormant state . This section provides a review of both strategies used by L. monocytogenes when it faces stresses. The following section discusses the stress response mechanisms of L. monocytogenes against two environmental stresses acid and chlorine as it travels through the human stomach or is exposed to food processing environments. 
.. Acid resistance of L. monocytogenes 
... Acid  
Acid stress is referring to the biological effect of low pH or weak  acid along or a combined effect of both . Exposure of bacteria to a low pH environment causes damage to cellular organs by denaturing proteins and hydrolyzing lipids  and genetic materials which can eventually lead to cell death . Weak acids in the protonated and uncharged forms can diffuse freely across the cell membrane; they dissociate and release protons inside the cell when the pH of the external environment is lower than the cytoplasmic pH resulting in cytoplasm acidification . A dramatic decrease in cytoplasmic pH can also damage cellular organs and lead to cell death .  
L. monocytogenes is one of the few foodborne pathogens which has a relatively strong acid resistance. The optimum pH value for the growth of L. monocytogenes is between . and . and it can survive between pH . and . . In order to preserve its cellular pH homoeostasis inside the stomach of the host or in the presence of weak acid preservatives L. monocytogenes can acquire enhanced acid resistance through two mechanisms growthphase dependent acid resistance  and the adaptive acid tolerance response  .  
... Acid response mechanisms  
For Grampositive bacteria such as L. monocytogenes the alternative sigma B factor  regulates bacteria survival under environmental stresses and virulence . The alternative ?B encodes at least  genes of general stresscoping genes and several virulence genes including the master regulator of virulence gene expression prfA . When L. monocytogenes cells are exposed to a stress the stress is first sensed and signaled through a regulatory cascade by activating the alternative ?B factor followed by the transcription of stresscoping genes .  
Growthphase dependent acid resistance  is a general acid tolerance mechanism that L. monocytogenes can acquire upon entry into the stationary phase  . L. monocytogenes in the stationary phase appears to be the most acidtolerant as compared to early log and midlog phase cells when they are exposed to the same acidic conditions . Another cellular mechanism used by L. monocytogenes to acquire enhanced resistance to acid stress is through the adaptive acid tolerance response  . AATR is activated when L. monocytogenes is preexposed to mild acidic conditions  and this allows the cells to develop enhanced resistance to lethal acid exposure e.g. pH . . The AATR mechanism of L. monocytogenes involves at least  regulatory responses and they are listed in Table . along with the corresponding genes and functions. 
Three regulatory responses glutamate decarboxylase system  arginine deiminase system  and agmatine deiminase system  play significant roles in improving acid resistance of L. monocytogenes under low pH conditions . GAD ADI and AgDI systems consume intracellular H+ ions by breaking down glutamate arginine and agmatine respectively and the intermediate or end products are transported outside the cells through antiporters . The consumption of intracellular H+ ions leads to an increase in intracellular pH and thus preserves the pH homoeostasis of L. monocytogenes. Studies have shown that the activation of the GAD and 
ADI systems is mainly controlled by the alternative ?B factor . Other than consuming the intracellular H+ ions through deamination reactions ADI and AgDI systems also produce ATP as one of the byproducts. The production of ATP from ADP is achieved through the FFATPase system which excretes intracellular H+ out of the cytoplasm and leads to a further reduction in the proton concentration in the cytoplasm of L. monocytogenes . 

.. Disinfectant resistance of L. monocytogenes  
The sanitizing/disinfecting procedures in food processing plants is the foundation to producing high quality safe food. Food companies establish Sanitation Standard Operating Procedures which are detailed procedures specifying what to clean how to clean how often to clean and the records used for monitoring . There are a variety of disinfectants e.g. acid anionics iodophors peroxide chlorine etc. that are used in food processing plants to inactivate bacteria that are found in foods or in the environment of food processing plants . Studies have demonstrated that both Grampositive and Gramnegative bacteria are capable of developing resistance to disinfectants through a long and/or repeated exposure . 
... Chlorine 
Chlorine  or bleach is an effective chemical sanitizer that serves as a disinfectant germicide algaecide and antislime agent . Other than its use in drinking water disinfection and freshcut produce decontamination Cl is also one of the disinfectants commonly used in dairy processing plants to sanitize the foodcontactsurfaces  of equipment . 
The most common form of Clbased sanitizers is either liquid or solid. The solid form of Cl e.g. calcium hypochlorite is relatively more stable and contains more available Cl as compared to liquid forms of Cl e.g. sodium hypochlorite . When dissolved in water Cl reacts with water forming hypochlorous acid  which dissociates to form hypochlorite  in an alkaline environment . All three compounds Cl HOCl and ClO exist together in equilibrium. HOCl is a more powerful disinfectant and oxidizer than ClO; thus maintaining the pH value of Cl solution at a range of . to . can achieve the best biological control since HOCl predominates in the solution . However a Cl solution with a pH value between . and . is commonly used due to safety concerns since the highly toxic and corrosive Cl gas is produced under an acidic environment . 
Since HOCl can react with organic matters and oxidizable species it is recommended to use Cl solutions which contain more than  ppm of freeCl to ensure sufficient disinfection 
. To sanitize the nonporous FCS of equipment 
 to  ppm of Clbased sanitizers are recommended to be used in the dairy processing plants . A contact time of  min or greater is typically sufficient to achieve a thorough kill . 
Similar to the acid stress Cl could interact with lipid protein substances in the bacterial cell membrane forming toxic chlorocompounds which can cause cell membrane damage and lead to cell death due to the leakage of proteins and genetic materials from the cells . Cl also generates hydroxyl radicals and these oxidative species can disrupt cell membranes and metabolic processes . 
... Chlorine resistance  
Although Cl is remarkably efficient in inactivating bacteria with lethal damage occurring within  milliseconds of exposure bacteria are capable of repairing the damaged organelles or recovering from the stress if they are exposed to sublethal doses of Cl . There is little evidence for a systematic cellular response of bacteria especially Grampositive bacteria associated with Cl stress but current studies have shown that bacteria could upregulate the expression of several detoxifying genes and enzymes that are responsible for repairing damaged proteins and genetic materials . 
Enzymes which play an important role against oxidative stress e.g. catalases and peroxidases are also involved in coping with Cl stress. Several research groups found that the expression of catalaserelated genes was upregulated in Escherichia coli Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus cereus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa when bacteria were exposed to Clbased sanitizers .  
To cope with protein unfolding and aggregation caused by Cl bacteria have been found to upregulate the expression of ATP  independent HOCl sensing chaperones such as Hsp  RidA and Cnox to bind to other proteins and thus prevent further damage . It is clear based on transcriptional and proteomic results that the unfolded protein response was strongly activated in 
E. coli B. cereus and P. aeruginosa .  
.. Dormant cells   
Other than using the aforementioned stresscoping strategies to enhance the resistance to stress in the current physiological state under harsh conditions another effective strategy for bacteria to survive is to enter a state of dormancy. The dormant state refers to a distinct physiological state of bacteria in which they can survive for an extended period of time under unfavorable conditions. Dormant cells usually arrest their growth in response to the stress and resume growth once they exit from dormancy under favorable conditions . One of the wellstudied types of dormancy for bacteria is sporulation. Bacterial spores are highly resistant to environmental stresses e.g. heat extreme temperatures and can survive for years . Two types of dormant states have been discovered for nonsporulating bacteria i.e. VBNC and persistence; cells that are in the corresponding states are referred as VBNC and persister cells .  
... VBNC cells  
The VBNC state is a dormant state for viable nonsporulating microorganisms which lose the ability to grow on media that they would normally grow on; VBNC cells typically exhibit lower metabolic activities than their actively growing counterparts and can be revived/resuscitated under specific conditions . Todate over  bacterial species have been shown to enter the VBNC state and  of the species could be resuscitated; the resuscitation steps in the other half of the population were either not attempted or the conditions for resuscitation are still unknown . Over the past few decades the VBNC state was known to be one of the survival responses that cells could use when they encounter environmental stresses .  
... Persister cells  
Although a universal definition is lacking persister cells generally refers to a subpopulation of cells that demonstrate temporary phenotypic antibiotic resistance due to their ability to enter the temporal dormant state . Compared to VBNC cells persister cells are generally culturable . Persister cells are classified into two types based on the way they are generated; type I persisters refer to the cells that enter dormancy upon exposure to environmental stresses  and they are usually produced during the stationary phase . Type II persisters are produced stochastically during the exponential growth phase regardless of the bacterial environment. They can spontaneously switch back to the growing state and typically make up less than  of the original population . Persister cells have been widely discussed in the medical field whereas VBNC cells are more relevant to the food sector . In this thesis we focus on examining the behaviours of VBNC cells. 
.. L. monocytogenes in the VBNC state  
... VBNC induction conditions and proposed mechanisms  
L. monocytogenes in the VBNC state was first discovered in fresh and microcosm water when there were large discrepancies in bacterial counts obtained using the culturedependent method and microscopybased method . After decades of research on the VBNC state of L. monocytogenes several studies found that bacteria can transition to the VBNC state when they are exposed to stresses and can be resuscitated under certain conditions . 
Table . summarizes the various induction and resuscitation conditions of VBNC L. 
monocytogenes. Environmental stresses e.g. extreme temperature starvation desiccation or the presence of salt disinfectant acids or food preservatives can induce L. monocytogenes from the growing state into the VBNC state . The transition period can vary from a few minutes and last up to several months depending on the induction conditions which seems to suggest that a change in the physiological state of L. monocytogenes could be a stepwise process.  
Although the molecular mechanism of the formation of the VBNC cells is still not fully understood researchers have suggested several mechanisms that may play an integral role in the formation and maintenance of VBNC cells especially for Gramnegative bacteria . It is widely accepted that the alternative sigma factor  regulates the expression of stresscoping genes to protect bacteria from unfavorable growth conditions. Bhagwat et al.  and Boaretti et al.  found that the depletion of rpoS gene in E. coli could help the cells enter the VBNC state faster than the wildtype strain. In addition the rpoS gene was continuously expressed by VBNC cells of V. vulnificus . Thus it seems that the rpoS gene may delay the formation of the VBNC cells but it is also likely to provide additional protection after cells have entered the VBNC state.  
Several studies have also suggested that the stringent response may facilitate the cells entering the VBNC state under amino acid depletion by producing the alarmones guanosine tetraphosphate  and/or pentophosphate  . The ppGpp compound which is regulated by protein RelA and SpoT can inhibit cellular processes that expend a significant amount of resources and energy e.g. cell division and protein synthesis . Mishra et al.  found that the relA gene was upregulated in VBNC cells of Vibrio cholerae. In addition E. coli cells that lacked ppGpp generated a lower level of VBNC cells as compared to the wildtype .  
Furthermore researchers have found that the toxinantitoxin system  could control the reversible transition between the VBNC and growing states of bacterial cells . Under certain conditions the TAS appears to be able to facilitate the transition of the cells between different states. For instance when environmental conditions are not suitable for growth the production of toxin proteins can lead to a decrease in cell growth and subsequently increase the numbers of VBNC cells. In contrast if the VBNC cells are exposed to favourable conditions antitoxins would be produced to protect the cells from the toxins and thus growth would resume . Demidenok et al.  showed that the overexpression of VapB antitoxins prevented the cells of Mycobacterium smegmatis from entering the VBNC state whereas the overexpression of VaC toxin induced the VBNC state. 
However little is known about the mechanism of VBNC cell formation in Grampositive bacteria.  
... Resuscitation conditions and proposed mechanisms  
Resuscitation refers to the molecular changes within cells as they exit dormancy . The resuscitation of VBNC cells has been studied extensively among a variety of bacterial species . Several factors might affect resuscitation e.g. strain variation induction conditions resuscitation conditions and the age of the VBNC cells which have been clearly demonstrated in the resuscitation studies of VBNC E. coli V. parahaemolyticus and S. Typhimurium cells . Several conditions have been identified to stimulate the resuscitation of VBNC cells 
e.g. a temperature upshift the addition of rich medium carbon sources  and/or amino acids . However these stimuli may not be applicable to all bacterial species and are dependent on the factors mentioned above.  
When the condition is favourable for growth signalling molecules secreted by the cells can facilitate the phase transition of VBNC cells. For example the resuscitation promoting factor Rpf can bind to the surface receptors of the VBNC cells and trigger the resuscitation process . Panutdaporn et al. and Pinto et al.  found that Rpf can promote the growth of Salmonella enterica and help resuscitate the VBNC cells of E. coli in the presence of proteinase K. For L. monocytogenes the function of protein Lmo and Lmo may be equivalent to the Rpf protein . 
The autoinducer  belongs to the group of autoinducers that are heatstable quorumsensing signalling molecules produced by both Grampositive and Gramnegative bacteria for the purpose of bacterial communication . The presence of these signaling molecules can alter gene expression activities when their intracellular concentration has reached a threshold . AI has been shown to promote the resuscitation of the VBNC cells of V. vulnificus while AI mutants of the VBNC cells were not able to be resuscitated under the same conditions . 
Although the resuscitation of VBNC L. monocytogenes has been studied for over a decade  only chicken embryonated eggs have been found capable of resuscitating the VBNC cells . Some of the unsuccessful resuscitation conditions have included a temperature upshift or the addition of carbon sources  into the VBNC culture . Other conditions that may help to resuscitate the VBNC cells of L. monocytogenes need to be explored.

.. Detection of L. monocytogenes VBNC cells  
Since bacteria in the VBNC state are not culturable the traditional culturedependent method could lead to an underestimation of the total number of viable cells if VBNC cells are present. Therefore several biomarkers e.g. cell size membrane integrity nucleic acid or metabolic activities of the cells are used for determining the viability of the cells . 
ViabilityqPCR  is one of the methods widely used to determine cell viability based on membrane integrity. Compared to traditional qPCR vqPCR involves the use of a DNA intercalating dye which can bind to the DNA of the dead cells with compromised cell membranes . In general viable cells have intact cell membranes whereas compromised/dead cells are more likely to have damaged membranes with the DNA from the dead cells being exposed to the environment . Therefore one can differentiate the dead and living cells by adding cellpermeant or cellimpermeant dyes to the samples.  
The propidium monoazide dye  for example is a cellimpermeant dye commonly used in bacterial viability evaluations . Upon photoactivation the nitrene group of PMA covalently bonds to the DNA of the dead cells and can induce a conformational change of the nucleotides. Thus the DNA of the dead cells cannot be amplified during qPCR since the DNA polymerase can no longer bind to the target site leading to a signal reduction .  
It is noteworthy to mention that PMAqPCR can lead to falsepositive results when the dead cells have an intact cell membrane. This could happen when cells are exposed to treatments such as UV irradiation which causes nucleic acid damage in contrast to membrane lysis induced by stresses such as chlorine ozone or acid . Other methods e.g. the direct viable count and luminescent ATP detection which are based on the cell size and ATP production of the viable cells are also widely used to differentiate living and dead cells . 
 
. L. monocytogenes and milk 
.. Microbial safety of dairy products  
Human have been drinking milk from mammals e.g. cows buffaloes and goats for more than  years . Nowadays it is still an essential part of the diet for  million people in the world . A variety of popular dairy products e.g. cheese butter yogurt and ice cream are produced from or containing milk. Among the milk of all animals bovine milk is consumed by a majority of people worldwide. Whole bovine milk is composed of approximately  water  protein  fat  sugar and  mineral and vitamins . Milk contains excellent nutrient sources that benefit human health and it also provides an ideal growth environment for microorganisms. 
There are a variety of microorganisms that can be found in milk at different milk processing stages i.e. prepasteurization pasteurization and postpasteurization. Unpasteurized milk  is often linked to foodborne outbreaks and can cause severe foodborne illnesses . It contains a wide range of microbes including bacteria viruses molds protozoan and parasites  . The microbes can be classified into three groups namely beneficial spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms. Raw milk naturally contains beneficial bacteria e.g. lactic acid bacteria  which are commonly used as starter cultures for producing cultured dairy foods. 
LAB can also be used as probiotics which provide wellestablished health benefits for humans 
.  
Pathogenic bacteria such as Bacillus cereus Salmonella spp. E. coli O:H L. 
monocytogenes or molds  can be found in raw milk from infected cattles or from the environment due to poor milk handling . Pathogenic bacteria are known to cause milkborne diseases including listeriosis campylobacteriosis tuberculosis brucellosis and typhoid fever . However with mandatory pasteurization and hygienic milk production practices a majority of harmful and spoilage microorganisms can be eliminated. 
Pasteurization is a heat treatment  that aims to reduce the population of pathogenic microbes to a level which health hazards are minimized in milk or other lowacid foods . Pasteurization is designed to achieve a log reduction in microbial load using the most heatresistant bacteria Coxiella burnetii as a reference . 
It became a part of the mandatory milk processing procedure across the U.S and Canada in the late ’s . There are still spoilage organisms that can survive after the sufficient pasteurization process including sporeformers such as Bacillus and heattolerant nonspore formers e.g. Microbacterium Micrococcus etc. . Some of these bacteria can grow under refrigeration conditions causing deterioration in milk .  
After milk pasteurization the microbial population from the milk should reach an acceptable level which does not pose a health risk to consumers. However postpasteurization contamination could occur due to unsanitary practices during packaging transportation and storage. Several microbes including both spoilage and pathogenic microbes can be found in commercial milk products . Pathogenic bacteria such as Salmonella spp. E. coli O :H or L. monocytogenes can be found in the production environment . Even though the food is kept at refrigeration conditions during transportation or storage bacteria 
e.g. L monocytogenes are still able to grow and pose a potential health risk to the public. 
.. L. monocytogenes in milk – outbreaks and detection 
Listeriosis outbreaks associated with dairy products have been reported worldwide since the early s. Currently L. monocytogenes still remains a significant threat to public health. Over the past  years outbreaks linked to raw milk have decreased significantly due to the introduction of onfarm food safety programs and better efforts by industry to prevent crosscontamination in dairy processing facilities . However there have been listeriosis cases associated with raw and pasteurized milk due to postpasteurization contamination . In addition two listeriosis outbreaks associated with chocolate milk have been reported . Flavoured bovine milk e.g. chocolate milk and strawberry milk have become a popular choice among Canadians since they are considered to be a heathier alternative as compared to soda drinks. Although flavoured milks contain all the nutrients found in milk they also contain sugars and flavouring which may promote the growth of foodborne pathogens .  
PulsedField Gel Electrophoresis  or MultiLocus Sequencing Typing  has been widely used for subtyping strains of L. monocytogenes isolated from foodborne outbreaks . In recent years whole genome sequencing  has become the gold standard replacing PFGE and is an important subtyping tool to understand genetic relationships between strains .  
In the food industry standard cultural validated procedures are used as reference methods for regulatory purposes for microbial food safety testing in the U.S and Canada . There are two commonly used culturebased methods for detecting and isolating L. monocytogenes in food and environmental samples in the U.S.:  the FDA bacteriological and analytical method  which includes the standard culturebased method and alternative rapid methods  approved by AOAC ;  the USDA protocol 
MLG..  which applies to meat eggs and environmental samples . In Canada it is recommended to use validated Health Canada methods such as MFHPB and MFLP which appear in the Compendium of Methods to detect and characterize L. monocytogenes in food and environmental samples . Rapid methods e.g. ELISA or PCR are considered as additional methods . Real timeqPCR  is commonly used by public health inspectors for L. monocytogenes screening from food and environmental samples .  
.. The effect of milk fat on the survival of L. monocytogenes 
It is known that the food matrix can affect the survival and possibly the virulence of bacteria in food . For example L. monocytogenes can produce unique meatexpressed proteins in sliced turkey meat . Among a variety of food ingredients in dairy products milk fat may play an important role in food and pathogen interaction since high fat dairy products e.g. chocolate milk ice cream and cheese have been linked with listeriosis outbreaks . 
Most of the dairy products are either water in fat or fat in water emulsions depending on the water and milk fat ratio . In liquid pasteurized bovine milk for example spherical or irregularly shaped fat droplets  are dispersed in a continuous water phase after the homogenization step during milk processing . Bovine milk fat is mostly composed of long chain fatty acids  and some short chain fatty acids  . Several studies have demonstrated that both saturated long and short chain fatty acids can exhibit antibacterial activity among Grampositive bacteria  and that unsaturated FAs appear to have greater antimicrobial activity than saturated FAs .  
A few studies have suggested that the milk fat content can affect the survival of L. 
monocytogenes in milk under various stresses e.g. heat treatment and the GI conditions of rats . Some studies which determined the effect of milk fat content on the growth of L. monocytogenes in pasteurized raw bovine milk  butter  yogurt  and vanillaflavoured yogurt 
 showed that there was little or no effect . For flavoured milks such as chocolate milk a few studies have demonstrated that L. monocytogenes inoculated into chocolate milk had similar growth rates as compared to regular milks although flavoured milks contains additional ingredients . Interestingly the additional ingredients from the chocolate milk such as sugar cocoa powder and carrageenan have previously been shown to either support or inhibit the growth of L. monocytogenes . 
 
 
 
 Human GI simulators 
.. Overview of GI simulator models 
Gut simulators were introduced in the s to study the health and disease aspects of the animal digestive system especially in humans. The models recreate parts of the digestive system using bioreactors and media to mimic the compartments and fluids of the animal GI tract. Over the past decade studies related to the effects of food components and drugs on human intestinal microbiota have been conducted extensively using human GI models . 
There are three types of GI models the batch culture multicompartment chemostat type and multicompartment nonchemostat type. The static batch culture consists of smallscale bottles containing simulated fluids and the microbiome from a specific compartment of the human GI tract . Due to the accumulation of bacterial metabolites and nutrient depletion in the bottles the system typically runs for a short period of time a few hours or up to three days. The batch culture model is commonly used for studying the effects of added components such as bacterial strains or food components on a compartment of the human GI tract. 
Multicompartment chemostatic simulators are GI models that consist of sequentially attached vessels/bioreactors with a computercontrolled fluid transition system . Chemostatic simulators help to maintain a steady state for microorganisms to propagate nondisruptively since fresh nutrients and microbial metabolites are constantly transferred between vessels in a sequential order. Chemostattype models include the EnteroMix Reading model SHIME  and MucousSHIME 
. 
Detailed information regarding the SHIME system can be found in section ... 
Multicompartment nonchemostatic simulators e.g. the TNO intestinal model developed by Minekus et al.  is comprised of two complementary systems TIM and TIM. The TIM mimics the human stomach and small intestine while TIM resembles the human proximal colon. Both systems are consisted of multiple glass modules in a loopshaped system with a flexible wall inside to mimic compartments of the human GI tract  Compared with chemostatic simulators fluid transportation of the nonchemostat type is executed through peristaltic valve pumps.  
.. The Simulator of Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem  
The SHIME is one of the gut GI models that can mimic the entire human GI tract. The model has been used for both scientific and industrial projects and validated with in vivo parameters . The reactor setup was first adapted from the first generation of the SHIME developed by Molly et al. . The TwinSHIME which allows the operation of two systems in parallel was developed in  for conducting comparative studies. Figure . is an example of the TwinSHIME setup.  
The SHIME system consists of multicompartment vessels that simulate the upper  and lower  human GI tract. The entire computercontrolled machine is operated at human body temperature  under anaerobic conditions. The vacuum pumps located on the cabinet unit allow the uptake of a defined amount of food and simulated fluids to be transferred between vessels at certain speed after specified intervals. The SHIME system is also able to simulate the gradual acidification process which occurs in the human stomach during food digestion. Since the entire equipment is detachable the model also allows the simulation of any region of the GI tract from the stomach to colon. In addition the model can mimic the absorption and/or digestion of food when a dialysis unit is attached.  

 
Studies related to probiotics prebiotics antioxidants and antibacterial agents have been conducted extensively using the SHIME . There is an increasing trend towards using the SHIME in the field of food safety as it is a useful tool to simulate the potential responses of the human’s GI system upon the ingestion of beneficial compounds or contaminants. In one of the thesis projects the SHIME system was used to simulate the physiological conditions of the human stomach to study the behaviours of L. monocytogenes as it travels through the first and major hurdle of the human GI tract. 
 
.. Survival of L. monocytogenes using human GI models  
Several studies have examined the survival of L. monocytogenes using different human GI models. Ferreira et al.  and Jiang et al.  evaluated the survival of L. monocytogenes in the midlog phase after being statically exposed to the simulated gastric fluid  with pH values between . and . for  to  h. Both studies found that the survival rates were less than  after the exposure. Furthermore Ferreira et al.  examined the survival of L. monocytogenes in different growing phases  and concluded that L. monocytogenes became more tolerant to acid stress after entering the stationary phase . 
Several research groups examined the survival of stationaryphase cells of L. 
monocytogenes during in vitro human GI digestion . Pettersen et al.  and Ramalheira et al.  found that the numbers of L. monocytogenes were reduced by  to  logs among the strains tested after a  to  h of static exposure to SGF  or acidified buffered peptone water  leading to a conclusion that the survival of L. monocytogenes was straindependent. A similar population reduction was observed in a study which exposed L. monocytogenes to a sublethal acid stress  before introducing them to a lethal acid stress  for a h of simulated gastric exposure . 
BarmpaliaDavis et al.  exposed  L. monocytogenes strains individually to the SGF for  h with the pH value of the mixture being adjusted from . to . throughout the exposure to mimic the in vivo gastric pH values of adults after food ingestion. There was a  to log reduction of L. monocytogenes during the first  min of exposure across all strains. It is noteworthy to mention that the reduction in the level of L. monocytogenes observed in this study were smaller than those observed in the other aforementioned studies over the  min of exposure. Overall studies using in vitro human digestion models to examine the survival of L. monocytogenes in the presence of food are still limited.  
Chapter  Materials and Methods 
. Bacterial strain information 
.. L. monocytogenes strain and growth conditions  
A total of five L. monocytogenes strains ILSI     and PF were used in the studies. Strain origins and further details can be found in Table .. All of the strains were isolated from dairy sources and include three common humanlisteriosis causing serotypes b /a and /b . All stock cultures were stored in freezing media ) in cryogenic vials at .  
 
All L. monocytogenes strains were tested for purity and the identities were confirmed by S ribosomal RNA  partial sequencing prior to stock culture preparation. Briefly each L. monocytogenes strain was streaked onto Columbia agar with   sheep blood  and plates were observed at  after  h of incubation. The identity of each strain was confirmed to the closest taxonomic level  based on partial sequencing of the S rRNA gene .  
The following procedures were used to prepare L. monocytogenes strains in the stationary phase. Each L. monocytogenes strain was streaked from the frozen stock onto Brain Heart Infusion agar  and incubated for  h at . A single colony was then inoculated into  mL of BHI broth and incubated for    h. The overnight culture was then subcultured into warm BHI broth and incubated at  for    h with shaking  after the inoculum obtained an optical density  reading close to . measured at wavelength  nm  using a Beckman DU  UV/Vis spectrophotometer.  
 
.. Serotyping of L. monocytogenes by multiplexPCR  
Genomic DNA of L. monocytogenes was extracted using InstaGeneTM matrix . Briefly   of an overnight culture was pelleted at  x g for  min. The supernatant was discarded and resuspended in   of InstaGene TM matrix. After incubating the sample for  min in a water bath at  and  min in a heat block at  the sample was pelleted again at  x g for  min to separate bacterial DNA and the InstaGene TM matrix. The supernatant which contained the bacterial DNA was collected and stored at .  
The serotype of strain PF was determined by MPCR Table . section A includes the information of three set of primers used for serotyping. All oligonucleotides used in the studies were synthesized by Eurofins Genomics . PCR reactions were conducted using a Biometra TProfessional Basic Gradient Thermocycler  in . mL PCR tubes. Each MPCR reaction was performed using a final volume of   including   of DNA template X ThermoPol reaction  
 

buffer   . ?M forward and reverse primer mix . mM deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates  . mM magnesium sulfate  and . U of Taq DNA polymerase . Each PCR cycle was consisted of an initial denaturation step at  for  min and  cycles of  for  sec    for  sec   for  min; followed by  cycles of  for  sec  for  sec  for  min with a final elongation step of  for  min.  
Gel electrophoresis of PCR amplicons was carried out on   agarose  gel in X TrisAcetateEDTA buffer  on the Mini subcell GT horizontal electrophoresis system  at  V for  min followed by 
 V for    min. The amplicons were stained with EZVision Three dye  and visualized using the ChemiDoc Imaging System .  
 
. Survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine milk under simulated human gastric conditions using the Simulator of Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem   
.. Aerobic microbial profile screening of commercial bovine milk  
In order to minimize the potential interferences of the microbes from commercial bovine milk on L. monocytogenes the aerobic microbial profiles of milk from two Canadian dairy brands A & B were evaluated and compared. The filtered  milk  milk  chocolate milk and . milk from brand A and B were purchased from local grocery stores . One lot of the milk product was screened for each brand. The milk with the least number of microbes was selected and used as the food model in all studies. 
 The procedure was adapted from Gelda et al.  with modifications. Briefly   of milk was taken from the  L carton and plated on blood agar in technical triplicate. All plates were incubated at  for  h followed by another  h of incubation at room temperature 
 under aerobic conditions to detect the presence of mesophiles psychrotrophs and fungi. The plates were inspected every  h throughout the   day incubation period. On the last day isolates with different phenotypes were subcultured onto blood agar  to assess for the presence of new phenotype growth. All isolates were then stocked in freezing media in cryogenic vials and stored at .  
To obtain the bacterial DNA of isolates for S rRNA sequencing single colonies of isolates were suspended in   of TE buffer ; .M 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ) and boiled at  in a water bath for  min. After pelleting out the cellular debris at  x g for  min supernatants which contained the genomic DNA of bacterial isolates were collected and stored at  until needed.  
The S rRNA partial sequencing was used to identify microbes isolated from the commercial milk products. Primers VKl and Vr  were used for amplifying the VV region of the S rRNA gene . Each PCR reaction had a final volume of   including   of DNA template X Thermopol Reaction Buffer  . mM dNTPs   pmol/ of each primer pair and . U Taq DNA polymerase . PCR reactions were carried out using a Biometra TProfessional Basic Gradient Thermocycler with the following conditions: an initial denaturation at  for  min and  cycles of   and  for  sec followed by a final extension at  for  min. Gel electrophoresis of PCR products was carried out with .   agarose gel in x TAE buffer using the Mini subcell electrophoresis system. The amplicons were stained with EZVision Three dye and visualized using the ChemiDoc Imaging System.  
PCR products were sent for sequencing at Advanced Analysis Center  Genomics 
Facility University of Guelph. Amplicon sequences were compared to the GeneBank database Basic Local Aligment Search Tool for Nucleotide  from U.S. National Center for Biotechnology Information  website . Genus and species of the unknown bacteria were determined according to their closest match in the database . 
 
.. Preparation of Simulated Gastric Fluid  pepsin solution and gastric pH profile 
The SGF of human adults was prepared based on an international consensus method developed for static in vitro digestion research . Table . includes a recipe of SGF and final concentrations of each ingredient. The concentrated electrolyte stock solution 
 was first prepared and the pH value of the stock was adjusted to . . or . with N 
HCl  using a calibrated pH meter . All solutions were filtersterilized using disposable filter units  prior to storing at  for a maximum of one month. The pH values of all SGFs were measured again before use to ensure that the pH was in the acceptable range .  
Frozen pepsin stock solution  was prepared as follows. Pepsin flakes  were first dissolved in cold deionized water  and stirred at room temperature for  min. The stock solution was then filtersterilized  and stored at  until needed. The pepsin stock solution was thawed at  overnight and added to the SGF solution to achieve a final concentration of  U/mL on the day of the experiment . All reagents were plated onto BHI agar plates to test for contamination two days prior to the experiment. Plates were incubated at  for  h. 
 
.. Preliminary studies related to the SHIME experiment  
... Acid tolerance screening of L. monocytogenes 
This experiment examined the survival of midlog and stationary phase L. monocytogenes strains b /b and /a under gastric acidity conditions ranging from a pH value of . to .. All bacterial isolates were grown in BHI broth overnight followed by subculturing into BHI broth for future growth at  to a OD value of . and . which represent midlog and stationary phases of L. monocytogenes. Strains were then exposed to the acidified BHI broth at pH . . . . and nonacidified BHI broth  statically in the presence of  U/mL of pepsin at  for  h. Samples were collected at t =   and  h and plated onto BHI agar in technical triplicate. All plates were incubated at  for  h. 
 
... Survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine milk under simulated human gastric conditions   
 
Protocols used to prepare food samples bacterial inoculates SGF and pepsin solutions were described in section ... Modifications are as follows only the L. monocytogenes strain ILSI   was evaluated and exposed to  mL of SGF  and milk mixture  at  for  h. In order to mimic the gradual acidification process occurring in the human stomach during food digestion the pH of the mixture was manually adjusted using sterile N HCl during the exposure. One millilitre of samples was collected at different time points t=  and  h for culturebased numeration on BHI agar plating in technical triplicate. All plates were incubated at  for  h. The experiment used a single lot of brand A  milk and conducted in two biological replicates.  
 
... Biofilm formation of L. monocytogenes on SHIME glass vessels 
 
This experiment was conducted to evaluate whether L. monocytogenes can form biofilms on the inner glass wall of the SHIME vessels during a h human gastric simulation. A rigorous sanitation procedure may need to be developed if bacterial biofilms are found on the inside of the vessels within  h. This protocol was developed based on Gemmell et al.  with modifications. Briefly the overnight culture of each L. monocytogenes strain ISLI     and PF  was diluted to  CFU/mL in BHI broth and transferred to sterile well microdilution plates with a negative and a positive control. Sterile glass coverslips  which was used to mimic the glass vessel were then added in each well of the well plates to allow bacterial adhesion during incubation. The well plates were properly covered using parafilm wraps to prevent evaporation during incubation at . All treatment samples and negative controls were incubated for  h whereas the positive controls were incubated for  h.  
Confocal Laster Scanning Microscopy  was used to visualize L. monocytogenes biofilms. For CLSM analysis all glass slides were washed with sterile distill water and airdried for an hour after incubation. The glass slides were then fixed by submerging in a :  formaldehyde solution for  min and stained with . acridine orange for  min. After washing off the excess stain using sterile distill water the slides were covered with cover slips and sealed properly using nail polish after they had been airdried for  h. L. monocytogenes cells were illuminated using a  nm Laster of  nm band pass emission filter for the detection of stained cells and biofilms. Photomicrographs of L. monocytogenes biofilms were captured using confocal laser scanning microscope . 
 
 
 
... Adaptation of L. monocytogenes in commercial  bovine milk 
The overnight culture of each of the L. monocytogenes strains ISLI     and PF  was inoculated in brand A  milk at  CFU/mL. All samples were then stored at  for  days. A total of  mL of sample was collected from all milk samples every  h for culturebased numeration and plated onto BHI agar in technical triplicate. All plates were incubated at  for  h.  
 
.. Survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine milk under simulated human stomach conditions using the SHIME system  
The survival of three L. monocytogenes strains ILSI   ILSI   and PF  inoculated in  milk was examined individually under simulated human gastric conditions with various SGF acidities . The experiment was conducted using two lots of  brand A filtered milk to minimize the variation from the food source. All L. monocytogenes strains were exposed to each lot of milk in biological replicates and technical triplicate.  
... SHIME hardware setup and calibration  
The automatic SHIME system can be seen in Figure .. The basic hardware of the SHIME was installed and calibrated  according to manufacturer recommendations a week prior to the experiment. The acid/base unit of the SHIME system was installed by connecting the aid/based stock solutions and pumps using the preautoclaved tubing. All tubings were primed to avoid oxygen entering the system and all acid/base pumps were calibrated to ensure the acid/base is transferred to the vessels at a certain speed. The SHIME vessel pH probes  were calibrated using a portable Oakton  pH meter . All of the probes were sterilized by exposing them to UV light for  min and storing the probes in the Biosafety Cabinet until needed. In addition a biofilm experiment was conducted to determine if special treatments needed to be included in the sanitation/cleaning protocol of the SHIME for biofilm removal .  
Aseptic techniques were used when setting up the major SHIME units on the day of the experiment. Four preautoclaved SHIME stomach vessels were first assembled including one for the negative control/NC  and three for the treatment vessels  in the Biosafety Cabinet. The sterile acid/base transfer tubing was then connected to the vessels to complete the acid/base unit setup. The entire closed system was maintained at  throughout the experiment after the water bath circulation unit was installed and activated. The temperature was checked and documented before and after the run using a thermometer . All vessels were stirred at  RPM at  and the pH of each vessel was constantly monitored throughout the experiment.  

... SHIME software setup  
Once the basic hardware setup was completed all SHIME components including pumps vessels pH probes and pH controllers were configured in the SHIME software and were assigned to the corresponding names of the hardware in the software. The calibration results gastric pH control actions and gastric pH profiles were input into the software prior to the experiment. 
... Bioreactor media and L. monocytogenes inoculation  
One day prior to the experiment each of the L. monocytogenes strains in the stationary phase  was resuspended in an equal volume of  milk and the inoculum was kept for  h at  for adaptation . Prior to inoculation  mL of the noninoculated  milk and  mL of SGF  at various pH values were transferred to each of the four SHIME vessels. The NC vessel contained clean milk and SGF with a pH value of . ; three treatment vessels contained clean milk and SGF pH . . or .. A total of  ml of L. monocytogenes inoculated milk or clean milk was injected into the treatment vessel or the NT vessel using  mL sterile BD syringes when the system was warmed up to . After inoculation each treatment vessel contained  mL of simulated gastric fluid  and  mL of  milk in : v/v ratio with L. monocytogenes inoculated at  log CFU/mL . The SHIME system was activated immediately for the simulation and operated for  h. The gastric simulation for all vessels was staggered for the convenience of sample collection. 
... Sampling and microbial analysis  
All sampling valves were sanitized with  bleach  min prior to the sample collection. 
Samples were collected using sterile lure lock BD syringes which were covered with sterile Al foil during transportation.  Before adding  mL of the inoculum . mL of sample was collected from each of the four vessels and plated onto blood agar in duplicate to check for contamination. The 
 
pH of the SGF and food mixture was adjusted every  min starting from the initial pH of the mixture to the gastric pH of fasting healthy adults  based on the preprogramed gastric profiles. For all treatment vessels  mL samples were collected at T=   . and  h for culturedbased enumeration and gene expression analysis . Tenfold serial dilutions of the samples were performed and plated onto both nonselective and selective agar  in triplicate. At the end of the experiment  mL of sample was collected from the NC vessel and plated onto blood agar to check for contamination during the run. All blood BHI and Oxford agar plates were incubated at  for  h.  
 
. Induction and resuscitation of viable but nonculturable  cells of L. monocytogenes  
.. L. monocytogenes cocktail preparation and storage  
A total of five L. monocytogenes strains  were used in the cocktail preparation including strain ILSI     and PF.  All strains were isolated from dairy sources and included three common humanlisteriosis causing serotypes b /a and /b. Each strain of stationary phase L. monocytogenes was harvested and concentrations of the bacterial lawn were determined using preprepared calibration curves . After diluting each of the strains to the same concentration all five strains were combined to yield a single L. monocytogenes cocktail with approximately equal concentrations of each strain. The cocktail was resuspended in sterile peptone water  and glycerol  solution and stored at  for a maximum of one month. The frozen L. monocytogenes cocktail was thawed on the day of the experiment at  and resuspended in an equal volume of . PW twice  to wash off glycerol in the media. The cell loss due to one freezethaw cycle was determined by comparing the concentrations of the cocktail before and after the cycle. Tenfold serial dilutions were performed in . PW and . mL of samples were plated onto BHI agar in triplicate. All plates were incubated at  for  h. 
.. Calibration curve preparation for bacterial culture and PMAxxqPCR 
... Bacterial culture 
 
A fivepoint calibration curve viable cell concentration vs OD was produced for each of the L. monocytogenes strains to determine the concentration of bacterial culture based on a given OD value. Tenfold serial dilutions of the fresh culture were performed in sterile . PW and plated onto BHI agar in triplicate to determine the bacterial concentration. All plates were incubated for  h at . Simultaneously twofold serial dilutions of the fresh culture were prepared and the OD  of all dilutions was measured in . mL polystyrene cuvettes  in triplicate. Calibration curves were then plotted based on the cell concentrations and OD readings of all twofold dilutions.  
... PMAxxqPCR  
A sevenpoint PMAxxqPCR calibration curve viable cell concentration vs quantification cycle  value was produced for the fresh fivestrain L. monocytogenes cocktail inoculated in  skim milk  chocolate milk or . milk . Tenfold serial dilutions of the cocktail mixture were performed in the SGF and milk mixture . All dilutions were plated onto BHI agar in triplicate to determine bacterial concentrations followed by PMAxx treatment DNA extraction and PMAxxqPCR  to determine the limit of detection  and quantification .  
... Evaluation of PMAxx discrimination efficiency 
Preliminary experiments were conducted to evaluate the discrimination efficiency of the 
PMAxx dye between live and dead L. monocytogenes cells. The overnight culture of one strain PF  was inoculated into  chocolate milk for this assessment. Dead cells were obtained  by incubating samples at  for  min and immediately cooled them on ice . Serial dilutions of both live and putative dead cells were performed in  chocolate milk and plated onto BHI agar to determine the viable cell concentration. After resuspended in . 
PW  ?L of samples were either untreated or treated with  ?L of the PMAxx followed by DNA extraction and PMAxxqPCR as described in section ... The ?Cq values for both live and dead cells were calculated as follow : 
?Cq = Cq – Cq   
By evaluating the ?Cq values of live cells  dead cells  and PMAxx treated cells  we could determine whether the PMAxx could inhibit the amplification of the DNA of the dead cells but not affect the amplification of the DNA of viable cells of L. monocytogenes. 
 
.. Viability assessment of L. monocytogenes by PMAxxqPCR  
All samples which were subjected to PMAxxqPCR were treated as followed: 
 
... PMAxx treatment  
The PMAxx treatment protocol was developed based on the Biotium PMAxx user guide  and Ly et al. . The PMAxx working solution  was freshly prepared from the PMAxx stock  using sterile nucleasefree HO  and stored at  under dark before use. Since the PMAxx dye is light sensitive all samples containing the dye were processed under low light conditions. A positive dead cell control  was included to validate discrimination efficiency of PMAxx on dead cell DNA. The sample was heated at  for  min followed by immediate cooling on ice. An aliquot of . mL of sample was plated onto BHI agar to check for survival.  
  A total of  µL of PMAxx  was added into  µL of the sample for a final concentration of  µM. All samples were covered with aluminum foil and the contents were mixed for  min at room temperature  using a Platform VariMix rocker . To photoactivate the PMAxx dye tube contents were transferred to fresh . mL microcentrifuge tubes and exposed to blue light for  min using GenIUL PhAST 
Blue system . Subsequently all samples were subjected to another  min mixing on the rocker followed by the second  min photoactivation step. All samples were transferred to fresh microcentrifuge tubes before centrifuging at  x g for  min to remove the excessive PMAxx dye and pellet out the bacterial cells. The supernatants were discarded and all pellets were stored at .  
... DNA extraction  
The total genomic DNA was extracted from the bacterial cell pellets using DNeasy PowerFood Microbial kit  following manufacturer’s recommendations with the following modifications. The PowerBeads tubes were vortexed for  min at speed . using the homogenizer  at room temperature . After being washed with Solution PW and ethanol the MB Spin Column which contained bacterial DNA was transferred into a clean  mL collection tube and centrifuged at  x g for  min. The eluted DNA was then added to the MB Spin Column again to wash off the residual DNA attached to the white filter membrane. All DNA samples were stored at .  
... PMAxxqPCR  qPCR reactions were performed using the CFX TouchTM RealTime PCR Detection System in HardShell well skirted PCR plates . The final reagent concentrations were determined and optimized based on PowerUp™ SYBR™ Green Master Mix user guide . Each PCR reaction had a final volume of   including   of DNA template X PowerUpTM SYBRTM Green master mix  nM forward and reverse primers hly 
 and nucleasefree HO. qPCR conditions were as follows: UDG activation at  for  min; DualLockTM DNA polymerase activation at  for  min;  cycles of  for  sec and  for  min followed by a default melt curve from  to . The qPCR reactions were conducted in technical triplicate including both experimental samples and notemplate controls.  
Data was processed and analyzed using BioRad CFX Maestro software . 
.. Induction and resuscitation of VBNC L. monocytogenes  
Chlorine was used in this study to induce L. monocytogenes to enter the VBNC state since it is one of the common disinfectants used in the dairy plants . In this study chlorine water solution was prepared using solid calcium hypochlorite CaClO . The amount of calcium hypochlorite required to prepare  ppm chlorine was calculated based on the equation below : 
 
[  chlorine desired ] x  = grams of bleach powder for each litre of water   chlorine in bleach powder
 
A total of  ± . mg of CaClO was dissolved in L of deionized water  in L volumetric flask to make  ppm/. chlorine stock solution. The solution was stirred and mixed for  min. Subsequently the solution was filtersterilized using . µm PES syringe filter 
 and stored at room temperature  under dark. On the following day the 
chlorine treatments were prepared on site by diluting the stock solution to the target concentrations in sterile D.I. HO. The pH values of all solutions were measured and maintained at . ± . since chlorine remains effective between the pH values of . to . .  
Two preliminary assays were conducted to optimize the VBNC induction condition. According to Highmore et al.  vigorously mixing L. monocytogenes in  ppm chlorine solution for  min can induce L. monocytogenes to enter the VBNC state. Therefore six treatments 
.      ppm and a control  chlorine solutions were evaluated in assay #. 
The freshly thawed L. monocytogenes cocktail was first washed with . PW as described in section ... The cocktail was then mixed with each treatment vigorously by vortexing at the maximum speed for  min and immediately resuspended in . PW after the treatment. Samples were taken for plating onto BHI agar in triplicate and for PMAxx treatment followed by DNA extraction and PMAxxqPCR . All plates were incubated at  for  h. In addition a side experiment was run in parallel to see if the sample mixing speed would have an effect on L. monocytogenes survival. Chlorine solutions consisting of  . . and . and  ppm were prepared and each one was mixed with the L. monocytogenes cocktail gently instead of vigorously for  min using a rocker. Samples were plated onto BHI agar to check for L. monocytogenes survival.  
For assay # the L. monocytogenes cocktail was resuspended in an equal amount of chlorine solution at concentrations of   . . . and  ppm respectively and samples 
were diluted using the corresponding chlorine solutions to achieve a final concentration of  CFU/mL of L. monocytogenes. All treatments were mixed on the Platform VariMix rocker for  min at high speed and centrifuged at  x g for  min immediately after mixing. The PMAxx treatment DNA extraction and PMAxxqPCR were replaced with resuscitation. The pellets were resuspended in an equal volume of brand A . milk and stored for  h at   and  for resuscitation. Samples were taken at t =  and  h and plated onto BHI agar in triplicate to validate the presence of VBNC cells. All plates were incubated for  h at .  
Three sevenpoint PMAxxqPCR calibration curves were prepared to quantify L. 
monocytogenes cocktail inoculated  milk  chocolate milk and . milk.  The protocols were described in the aforementioned section ... All samples were treated with PMAxx followed by DNA extraction and qPCR .  
The thawed fivestrain cocktail was first washed twice with . PW  and resuspended in an equal volume of   or . ppm chlorine solutions. The cell mixture was then diluted in  or . ppm chlorine solution to achieve a final concentration of  CFU/mL. Both treatment and control samples were mixed on the rocker for  min at high speed and centrifuged at  x g for  min immediately after mixing. After carefully pipetting out the supernatants all cell pellets were resuspended in an equal volume of  milk  chocolate milk and . milk and incubated at  for  h for resuscitation. Samples were taken at t =  and  h for culturebased numeration . T =  samples were also subjected to PMAxx treatment DNA extraction and qPCR  to confirm the presence of VBNC cells. The rest of the samples were stored at  for six days. Samples were collected on day   and day  for culturebased enumeration on BHI and Oxford agar. All plates were incubated at  for  h.  
 
. Effect of milk fat content on the survival of L. monocytogenes under human gastric simulation  
Three brand A filtered bovine milk products  milk   chocolate milk and . milk were used to evaluate the effect of milk fat content on the survival of L. monocytogenes in simulated human gastric conditions. Prior to inoculation all milk products were screened for background microbes on blood agar as described in section .. and plated on Oxford agar in triplicate to detect the presence of L. monocytogenes. All plates were incubated at  for  h. 
The SGF electrolyte solution was prepared as described previously in section .. SGF pH . was used in this experiment as it represents the median value of gastric acidity of health adults . The SGF pH . and pepsin stock solution  were prepared in advance and stored at  until use. All reagents were plated onto BHI agar to test for contamination two days prior to the experiment. Plates were incubated at  for  h. The fivestrain L. monocytogenes cocktail was first inoculated in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk respectively and then incubated for  h at  for adaptation.  
The simulation of gastric exposure is as described below. On the day of the experiment . mL of L. monocytogenes inoculated milk was mixed with . mL of noninoculated milk  before adding to the prewarmed  SGF solution which was consisted of . mL of SGF pH . and . mL of pepsin stock solution . The concentration of L. monocytogenes cocktail in the final food and SGF mixture  was  CFU/mL. The mixture was then incubated at  for  h to mimic gastric digestion for nonclear liquid food. The initial pH value of the SGF and food mixture was measured to be . ± . . The pH was manually adjusted using . N HCl every  min throughout the h exposure to simulate gastric gradual acidification process during food digestion. The final pH value was . ± . which is the gastric pH of healthy adults under fasting conditions. 
 Samples were collected at t =   . and  h for culturedbased enumeration. Tenfold serial dilutions were performed in . PW and plated onto both BHI and Oxford agar in triplicate. 
All plates were incubated at  for  h. Samples were also treated with PMAxx followed by DNA extraction and qPCR . PMAxxqPCR calibration curves were prepared as described in section .. to quantify the L. monocytogenes cocktail inoculated in a mixture of SGF pH . and  milk  chocolate milk or . milk. 
Prior to the PMAxxtreatment samples collected from the three treatments  were resuspended in an equal volume of . PW to remove potential inhibitors for PMAxx treatment. The centrifugation speed was optimized to ensure the pellets were neither too soft  or too hard . Samples collected from  and . milk treatments were pelleted at  x g for  min and resuspended in . PW while the samples collected from the  chocolate milk treatment were first centrifuged at  x g for  min to pellet out the cocoa power. Subsequently samples were centrifuged at  x g for  min after the supernatants were transferred into fresh tubes. 
 
. Experimental design and statistical analysis  
For all projects experiments were carried out in two biological replicates of L. 
monocytogenes with three technical replicates using two lots of food . The experimental unit was L. monocytogenes strain since the treatments were applied on the strains throughout the experiments. The detection and quantification limits of bacterial enumeration using the plating method were < . log CFU/mL and < . log CFU/mL respectively.  
All statistical computations were carried out using the Statistical Analysis Software system . A factorial design was used with a generalized linear mixed model to analyze all culturebased numeration and extrapolated qPCR data. The variance of the dependent variable which was the survival of L. monocytogenes was partitioned into fixed effects and random effects. Fixed effects are the effects caused by independent variables such as strains pH values and agar type all of which were the interests of this thesis. The effects of food lots and biological replicates were considered as random effects since the effects were not the interests of the current study thus they were separated from the statistical model. Sampling time was considered as a special fixed effect; in all of the trials which studied the effect of time on the survival of L. monocytogenes samples were repeatedly collected from the same subject over time which creates a correlation between the measurements obtained from the same subject and thus increases the correlated residual errors. Therefore this correlation was separated from the statistical model as a random effect since it was not the study of interest. All fixed effects and random effects were tested with Ftest and loglikelihood test respectively.  
Residual analyses were conducted to meet analysis of variance  assumptions confirming all data had a mean of  and was random homogenous independent of treatment and design effects and normally distributed. Both oneway and twoway ANOVA were performed to test the significant effects of fixed effects and their interactions. TukeyKramer Test was performed to determine the differences between levels of treatments. Mean differences were separated based on a type I error rate of . .  A sample of coding residual and variance analysis for L. monocytogenes acid tolerance SHIME project can be found in Appendix C Sample Statistical Analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter  . Results 
. Survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine milk under simulated human gastric conditions using the SHIME 
.. Aerobic microbial profile of filtered commercial bovine milk  
A total of five bacterial colonies were isolated from   and . filtered bovine milk products from brand A and B under the conditions described in section ... Among the L milk products from brand B no colonies/isolates were recovered from the  or . milk . The microbial count of the brand B  milk was  CFU/mL and these two colonies had distinctive phenotypes. Among the L brand A milk no colonies were recovered from the  milk and the . milk had a total aerobic plate count of  CFU/mL. There were  CFU/mL of aerobes present in the  milk and both colonies appeared to have identical phenotypes. No colonies/isolates were recovered from the  L brand A  milk  chocolate milk or . milk.  
The S rRNA partial sequencing was used to identify the five colonies isolated from brands A and B commercial milk products. Specieslevel identification  can be achieved with more than a  identity match. The bacterial colonies isolated from L brand B milk products were identified as Microbacterium flavum and lacticum Anoxybacillus flavithermus subsp. yunnanensis and Microbacterium ginsengiterrae were found in the L brand A milk products.  
Since the bacterial concentrations of the products obtained from both brands were similar the milk from brand A was chosen randomly. Among the products with various milk fat contents  milk was chosen as the food model in this study since it remains the highest sales volume among fluid milk products in Canada over the past few decades . 
 
.. Preliminary experiments of the SHIME study 
 
... Acid tolerance screening of L. monocytogenes 
Both midlog and stationary phase cells of L. monocytogenes displayed various degrees of susceptibility to gastric acidity and digestion time . The levels of L. monocytogenes which was inoculated at  log CFU/mL were reduced by  to  log CFU/mL during the h exposure to acidified BHI broth with pepsin at pH levels of . . . and .. All strains had less than  log CFU/mL of growth in unacidified BHI broth .  
 

 
Compared to the survival of midlog L. monocytogenes strains strains in the stationary phase were . to . log CFU/mL higher after the h exposure to BHI broth at pH . and . . The strain with serotype /b in the stationary phase appeared to be the most acidtolerant strain among others since overall it survived the best at pH values of . . and .. 
The log reduction in the survival of all strains at t =  h was higher than t =  h when exposed to the acidified BHI broth at pH . and . . All strains exposed to BHI broth at pH . were killed in less than  h except for the stationary phase cells of L. monocytogenes strain with serotype /b where there was only a . ± . log CFU/mL reduction at t = h and the strain was not detected after  h. None of the strains survived at lethal pH . i.e. they were eliminated within an hour. Since L. monocytogenes could not survive at pH values < .  SGF with a pH value of . was chosen as the lower boundary of the SGF acidity in the SHIME study.  
 
... Invitro survival of L. monocytogenes in  bovine milk under simulated human gastric conditions  
 
Before conducting the experiment using the bioreactor SHIME system a preliminary experiment was performed on one strain ILSI   to obtain an estimate of L. monocytogenes survival during the simulated gastric exposure. The experiment was conducted in test tubes which contained a mixture of  milk and SGF with a pH value of . . or .. The pH of the mixture was manually adjusted using N HCl during the exposure to mimic gastric gradual acidification.  
The levels of the ILSI  L. monocytogenes strain were reduced by <  log CFU/mL after a h exposure to the simulated gastric mixture except at the sampling time of t = h when SGF pH . was used and a . ± . log CFU/mL reduction was observed . By the end of the first hour of the exposure the pH values of SGF and milk mixtures had dropped from . to .  . to .  and . to . . There was less than a .log CFU/mL reduction in the levels of L. monocytogenes across all SGF pH values at t =  h. 
During the second hour of exposure the numbers of cells continued to decrease slightly when L. monocytogenes was exposed to the mixture of milk and SGF pH . or .. As expected there was a significant reduction  in the levels of L. monocytogenes exposed to the mixture of milk and SGF pH . during the second hour of the exposure.  
Overall this preliminary experiment closely reflected and predicted the survival of L. 
monocytogenes using the SHIME system. Compared to the results obtained from the SHIME study  this experiment demonstrated a smaller reduction  in the level of L. monocytogenes ILSI  under simulated human gastric conditions. However the results obtained from the SHIME experiment  may be more reliable since the sample size was larger and the automated SHIME equipment can mimic the physiological conditions of the human stomach more precisely than test tubes .  

 
 
 
 
... Biofilm formation of L. monocytogenes on SHIME glass vessels 
 
The confocal laser scanning microscopy images and transmission images  showed that biofilms did not form on the glass slides for all L. monocytogenes strains ILSI    and PF  after  h of incubation in BHI broth at  . The treatment results were consistent with the results obtained from the negative samples . After  h of incubation  all strains demonstrated the ability to form biofilms i.e. honeycomblike biofilms were found on all glass slides with slight variations across the strains. The biofilms formed by ILSI strain  had the greatest density among the strains tested followed by strains PF and ILSI .  

... Adaptation of L. monocytogenes in commercial bovine milk 
Trial experiments were conducted to determine the time required for L. monocytogenes to adapt to the milk environment before they were subjected to other treatments. There was an increase in the levels of all L. monocytogenes strains incubated at  for  days in  milk . Specifically the numbers of cells remained stable for the first  days followed by an increase from day  to day  demonstrating that the bacteria were exiting the lag phase. Therefore 
 h was chosen as the minimum amount of time L. monocytogenes required for adaptation in the  milk because there were no significant changes in the levels of L. monocytogenes from day  to day  .  
 
 .. Survival of L. monocytogenes in  bovine milk in a simulated human stomach model using the SHIME.  
The survival of three L. monocytogenes strains ILSI   ILSI   and PF  were evaluated individually in this study. After  h of adaptation in the  milk each strain was exposed to a mixture of equal volumes of SGF  and  milk under simulated stomach conditions of healthy adults in the SHIME system with dynamic pH changes occurring throughout the exposure. An example of the pH adjustment during the simulated gastric exposure monitored by the SHIME software can be seen in Figure A.. Samples were collected during the h exposure for culturebased numeration and gene expression .   
The variance analysis  was conducted to examine the effects of L. 
monocytogenes strain SGF acidity digestion time culture media and food lot on the survival of L. monocytogenes in milk under simulated human gastric conditions. There was no significant difference between the aerobic plate count of L. monocytogenes obtained from Oxford  and BHI agars throughout the h exposure except at sampling time t =  h when SGF with a pH value of .  was used. The levels of L. monocytogenes with serotypes b and /a obtained from BHI agar when exposed to SGF pH . at t =  h were . ± . and . ± . log CFU/mL which were slightly higher than the plate count obtained from Oxford agar . ± . and . ± . log CFU/mL respectively . There was also no significant variation in food lots . Interaction effects  were observed among four independent variables: SGF pHs strains digestion time and culture media. i.e. the effect of one variable on L. monocytogenes survival during the gastric simulation was dependent on the three other variables.  
Figure . shows the survival of each of the three L. monocytogenes strains during the h exposure to a mixture of  milk and SGF with a pH value of . . or .. All three strains which were inoculated at  log CFU/mL demonstrated similar survival patterns throughout the experiment i.e. all strains survived the h exposure to varying degrees. There was less than  log 
CFU/mL reduction  in the numbers of all strains after the exposure to the simulated gastric mixture for  h except when they were exposed to SGF pH .. In the latter case all strains showed approximately a  to log CFU/mL reduction in the levels of L. monocytogenes over the h exposure .  
Comparing the survival of the three strains under the simulated gastric exposure  the reductions in the levels of all three strains after the  h of exposure to milk and SGF pH . seemed to be greater than milk and SGF pH .; however only the serotype /a strain demonstrated statistical differences . In addition at t = . h the reduction in the number of the serotype /a strain exposed to SGF pH . was also greater than SGF pH .  followed by serotype /b  and b .  
Figure . compares the survival of L. monocytogenes across three strains when they were exposed to the same simulated human gastric conditions. When the SGF pH .  was mixed with an equal volume of  milk the levels of all three strains were reduced by less than . log CFU/mL over . h. However there was a . to .log CFU/mL reduction in numbers over the next  min as the pH value of the mixture approached .. At the end of the exposure period  L. monocytogenes serotype /a  appeared to be the most acidsensitive strain as compared to the b and /b strains  since a larger proportion of cells was eliminated . 
 
 
When L. monocytogenes was exposed to the milk and SGF pH . mixture  all strains showed no significant changes in the levels of cells from t =  to . h  and there was . to . log CFU/mL of reduction by the end of the h exposure. Interestingly serotype /a seemed to be the most acidtolerant strain when exposed to SGF pH . since the reduction in the level of cells  was the smallest among other strains .  
A slight increase in bacterial growth was observed across all strains after being exposed to a mixture of milk and SGF pH . for  h . However only the growth of serotype /b at t = h  was statistically significant . By the end of . h the survival of L. monocytogenes was straindependent ; the levels of serotype b /a and /b were reduced by . ± . . ± . and . ± . log CFU/mL respectively. Unlike the large decline in the cell numbers observed across all strains when they were exposed to milk and SGF with a pH value of . or . there was less than a .log CFU/mL reduction during the last  min of exposure to the mixture of milk and SGF pH .. Comparing the reductions in the levels of L. monocytogenes strains exposed to SGF with different pH values  the reductions between sampling time t =  h and . h in the mixture of milk and SGF of pH 
. were greater than for SGF of pH . and . for each strain.  
 
 
 
 
. Induction and resuscitation of viable but nonculturable  cells of L. monocytogenes  
.. Optimization: induction of VBNC L. monocytogenes using chlorine solution 
The preliminary results of VBNC optimization trial  are shown in Appendix B Preliminary 
Experiments. Instead of testing  to  ppm chlorine solution with  min of vigorous mixing   to  ppm chlorine with  min of gentle mixing was tested to induce L. monocytogenes into the VBNC state in trial . This is because similar reductions in the levels of L. monocytogenes were found and the latter method ensured that all samples were mixed evenly. In addition the resuscitation methods were introduced in trial  to determine the presence of VBNC cells. 
 

Figure . shows the survival of a fivestrain cocktail of L. monocytogenes treated with different levels of chlorine and then plated onto BHI agar before and after resuscitation at  or  for  h. The levels of culturable cells of chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes decreased as the chlorine concentration increased. The survival of L. monocytogenes treated with   . . ppm chlorine was . ± . . ± . and . ± . log CFU/mL respectively. After the treatments with . and . ppm chlorine for  min and no resuscitation there were no culturable cells of L. monocytogenes i.e. the cell numbers were below the limit of detection .  
After  h of resuscitation in .  milk at  there was approximately . to . log CFU/mL of culturable cells of L. monocytogenes treated with  to . ppm chlorine. In contrast the plate counts of L. monocytogenes treated with   . . and . ppm chlorine after 
 h of resuscitation in .  milk at  were . ± . . ± . . ± . and . ± . log CFU/mL respectively. The survival of L. monocytogenes treated with . ppm was below the detection limit both before and after resuscitation at  and .  
Among the various concentrations of chlorine tested the . ppm chlorine could be used to induce L. monocytogenes to enter the VBNC state because the treated cells became culturable after resuscitation at both  and . The  h of incubation at  was chosen as the resuscitation 
condition for the following study since a majority of the milk products are stored under refrigeration conditions.  
 
.. Resuscitation and quantification of chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk by culturebased method and PMAxxqPCR  
... Discrimination efficiency of PMAxx dye and PMAxxqPCR calibration curves  
Preliminary experiments were conducted to evaluate the discrimination efficiency of the PMAxx dye between live and dead cells of L. monocytogenes. Details of the methodology were described in section ... The ?Cq values for high  and low concentrations  of PMAxx treated and untreated live cells of L. monocytogenes were . and . cycles indicating that the presence of the PMAxx dye did not significantly suppress the amplification of the DNA of live cells. The ?Cq value of  log CFU/mL of dead cells  was  . cycles . The difference between the Cq values of  log CFU/mL of PMAxxtreated live and dead cells was . cycles indicating that the amplification of the DNA of dead cells was suppressed by approximately . fold or .. 
All qPCR runs were carried out using a sixpoint standard curve produced from fresh fold serial dilutions of L. monocytogenes  to ensure the amplification efficiency and R were falling between the recommended ranges i.e.  to  and  . respectively 
. The efficiencies of all qPCR reactions in this study were between . to .  and R values were  .. The melt curve obtained from each qPCR run contained one peak between  to   indicating that there might be one amplicon present. A single product of  bp was also observed when the qPCR amplicons were visualized in an agarose gel .  
Three point PMAxxqPCR calibration curves  were prepared for L. monocytogenes inoculated into  milk  chocolate milk and . milk. All curves had R values ranging from . to . and amplification efficiency between . and . . The detectable ranges of L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk were . – . . – . and .  . log CFU/mL respectively. The LOD LOQ Cq range and other information related to the calibration curve for quantifying L. 
monocytogenes in each milk product can be seen in Table .. 
  
... Resuscitation and quantification of chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes in bovine milk 
The prethawed fivestrain cocktail of L. monocytogenes  was subjected to VBNC induction using   and . ppm chlorine solution and resuscitation in   milk  chocolate milk and . milk at  for  h. The viability of L. monocytogenes was assessed by culturebased enumeration and PMAxxqPCR after chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes was resuspended in three types of milk products. Samples were taken for plating and PMAxx treatment immediately after being resuspended in milk. The nutrition fact labels and ingredients of all three milk products can be found in Figure A. and Figure A.. The bacteria loss associated with one freezethaw cycle was negligible . All milk products  contained <  CFU/mL of background microbes and were negative for L. monocytogenes .  
A twoway ANOVA was used to determine the effect of chlorine  and culture media on the survival of culturable chlorinetreated and untreated L. monocytogenes cells. It was expected that chlorine was going to influence the survival of L. monocytogenes . There was no statistically significant difference in the plate counts of chlorinetreated and untreated L. monocytogenes obtained from BHI and Oxford agar . A ttest was conducted to evaluate the effect of the quantification method on treated and untreated L. monocytogenes cells.  
Figure . demonstrates the viability of L. monocytogenes treated with  and . ppm chlorine when present in  milk  chocolate milk and  milk. The bacterial concentrations of nonchlorine treated culturable cells  resuspended in all three milk products as determined by the plating method were approximately .  . log CFU/mL which were similar 
 to the concentrations of viable cells obtained from PMAxxqPCR .  
The culturable cells of L. monocytogenes that were treated with . ppm chlorine and resuspended in three milk products were below the limit of detection . The viable cells  of chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes which were resuspended in  and  milk were detected but could not be quantified since the Cq values were out of the dynamic ranges of the corresponding calibration curves . However based on the LOQ of each calibration curve there were < . and . log CFU/mL of viable cells present in the  and  milk. Interestingly the level of viable cells of chlorinetreated L. 
monocytogenes resuspended in the  chocolate milk was . ± . log CFU/mL.  
 

The levels of culturable cells of chlorinetreated and untreated L. monocytogenes were determined after  h of resuscitation at  in three milk products. The levels of chlorinetreated 
L. monocytogenes were . ± . . ± . and . ± . log CFU/mL in  milk  chocolate milk and  milk respectively. The numbers of untreated L. monocytogenes were approximately . – . log CFU/mL in all three milk products. 
 
 
.. Survival of resuscitated L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and  milk during storage  
After  h of resuscitation at  samples of L. monocytogenes resuspended in  milk  chocolate milk and  milk were taken and stored at  for  days. The survival of chlorinetreated and untreated L. monocytogenes was monitored during the storage period. A twoway ANOVA was performed to evaluate the effects of storage time and culture media on the survival of resuscitated L. monocytogenes. There was no statistical difference in the survival of untreated L. monocytogenes obtained from BHI and Oxford agar . Although the survival of chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes obtained from BHI agar was higher than Oxford  during the storage period there was no statistical difference in L. monocytogenes survival . 
The level of untreated L. monocytogenes resuspended in  milk  chocolate milk and  milk increased over the day of storage . Among the three milk products the number of L. monocytogenes was the highest in  chocolate milk; the level of cells was increased from . ± . to . ± . log CFU/mL  by the end of the storage period. The levels of L. monocytogenes in  and  milk increased from approximately . to . log CFU/mL on day  . There was no statistical difference in the levels of L. monocytogenes between  and  milk  over the storage period.  
On the contrary there were no significant increases in the numbers of chlorinetreated L. 
monocytogenes in all three milk products  during storage. The levels of L. monocytogenes in three milk products were significantly different from each other  with the highest in  chocolate milk followed by  and  milk. There was no significant change  in the level of L. monocytogenes in  chocolate milk during the first  days of incubation . However the number of L. monocytogenes increased to . ± . log CFU/mL on day  . The levels of L. monocytogenes in  and  milk remained stable over the storage period with numbers of approximately . to . and . to . log CFU/mL respectively . 

. Effect of milk fat content on the survival of L. monocytogenes under simulated human gastric conditions  
.. Quantification of L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and  milk under simulated gastric exposure using the culturedependent method  
This study focused on examining the effect of milk fat content on the survival of the fivestrain cocktail of L. monocytogenes under simulated human gastric conditions of adults using three bovine milk products  milk  chocolate milk and  milk. The nutrition fact labels and ingredients of all three milk products can be found in Figure A. and Figure A.. Prior to inoculation all milk products were confirmed for the absence of background microbes and L. monocytogenes . All milk products were inoculated with an average of . log CFU/mL of L. monocytogenes. 
During the h simulated gastric exposure the pH of the mixture was adjusted  min prior to the sampling times of   . and  h using N HCl. The addition of HCl in three L. monocytogenes inoculated milk products containing various fat contents produced visible physical changes throughout the exposure as demonstrated in Figure .. After L. monocytogenes was inoculated into the milk  all milk products maintained their original pH values and appearances; they were turbid and opaque and dark brown in colour with  chocolate milk and ivory in colour with  and  milk . Upon the addition of HCl all milk products showed various degrees of protein denaturation e.g. changes in liquid turbidity and the presence of protein floccules. Interestingly the foam layer that formed on the top of the  milk was thicker than the other milk products after mixing. 
 

There was a decreasing trend in the survival of L. monocytogenes in all three milk products. The levels of L. monocytogenes inoculated in  and  milk remained stable during the first hour of exposure  followed by moderate decreases in the next  min . There was no statistical difference in the levels of L. monocytogenes in  chocolate milk during the . h of exposure  and a slight decline in the cell number . log CFU/mL was observed at the end of the exposure .  
Overall the survival of L. monocytogenes inoculated into  chocolate milk was higher than  and  milk throughout the exposure. The number of L. monocytogenes in  chocolate milk was the highest among other milk products during the first . h of exposure  except in  milk at t = h where there were no statistical differences in survival . At the end of the exposure  the reductions in the levels of L. monocytogenes were significantly different among  milk  chocolate milk and  milk ; the survival of L. monocytogenes was the highest in  chocolate milk followed by  and  milk which were 
.±. .±. .±. log CFU/mL respectively. In addition there were no statistical differences in the survival of L. monocytogenes between  milk and  milk at t =  and . h .  
No significant differences  were found between plate counts obtained from BHI and Oxford agar . There were no significant differences in the survival of L. 
monocytogenes between food lots . 
 
.. Quantification of L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and  milk under simulated gastric exposure using PMAxxqPCR  
Three point PMAxxqPCR calibration curves  were prepared for L. monocytogenes inoculated in a mixture of SGF pH . and  milk  chocolate milk or . milk. All three curves had R values from . to . and amplification efficiencies between . and . . The detectable ranges of L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk were . – . . – . and . – . log CFU/mL respectively. The LOD LOQ Cq dynamic range and other information of the PMAxxqPCR calibration curve for quantifying L. monocytogenes in the simulated gastric content were listed in Table .. 
 
When there was no pH adjustment at t =  h the survival of L. monocytogenes inoculated into all three milk products obtained using PMAxxqPCR was comparable to the corresponding aerobic plate counts  indicating that all culturable cells were viable . In addition there were no significant differences between culturable and viable cell counts of L. monocytogenes inoculated in  milk  and  chocolate milk  at t =  h. There was . ± . log CFU/mL of viable cells in . milk at t =  h; whereas the concentration of culturable cells counts was .  ± . log CFU/mL. 
During the second hour of simulated gastric exposure the levels of viable cells in all three milk products were significantly decreased by .  . log CFU/mL. At t = . h the numbers of viable cells of L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk obtained using PMAxxqPCR were reduced by . ± . . ± . and . ± . log CFU/mL respectively whereas the levels of culturable cells of L. monocytogenes in all three types of milk were reduced only by .  . log CFU/mL. After the h exposure to the SGF the numbers of viable cells continued to decrease across all three milk products with the largest reduction being observed in . milk  followed by  chocolate milk  and  milk . There was only a . to . log CFU/mL reduction in the numbers of culturable cells in all three milk products. Overall the number of viable cells was significantly lower than culturable cells across all milk product treatments at t = . and . h . 
 
 
Chapter  . Discussion 
The in vitro human gastrointestinal  models have been used to assess the behaviours of L. monocytogenes in the human GI tract . Previous studies have focused on evaluating the acid tolerance of L. monocytogenes under simulated human gastric conditions since the stomach is the first and major barrier against pathogens  .  
A majority of these studies have used static models containing acidified broths or buffer solutions  to mimic the human gastric conditions; the bacteria were either exposed to the simulated gastric content with a fixed pH value or preexposed to a sublethal acidic condition prior to a lethal exposure without the presence of food . The presence of a food matrix may affect the survival of pathogen in the stomach due to potentially strong buffering capacity . Therefore incorporating a food matrix and some dynamic aspects of gastric digestion into the model simulation could enhance our understanding of the behaviour of L. monocytogenes during simulated digestion in the host. The introduction of sophisticated dynamic in vitro digestion models such as the SHIME allows for a better simulation of human GI conditions by including the dynamic aspects of digestion such as the pH changes over time that occur in the human stomach and the transition of chyme across different GI compartments.   
 
. Survival of L. monocytogenes in bovine milk under simulated human gastric conditions using the SHIME  
 
In this study the survival of three L. monocytogenes strains  in the stationary phase was evaluated under simulated human gastric conditions using the SHIME system. Each strain was inoculated at  log CFU/mL and exposed to a mixture of brand A filtered  milk and simulated gastric fluid  with a pH value of . . or . with dynamic pH changes occurring throughout the exposure. The stationary phase of L. monocytogenes was used in all trials for the following reasons:  crosscontamination occurring along the food supply chain typically involves cells in the stationary state  and  cells in the stationary phase are more resistant to environmental stresses such as acid based on our preliminary results 
 and findings from previous studies .  
The physiological conditions of the stomach of healthy adults were mimicked in this study because the conditions of an adult’s stomach are welldocumented in terms of SGF compositions gastric acidity and gastric emptying/digestion time whereas the gastric conditions of individuals who are atrisk for listeriosis  are limited. The gastric acidity of adults under fasting conditions falls within an interquartile pH range between . and .  and the gastric emptying/digestion time for nonclear liquid food is up to  h . 
In this study for all  strains tested the numbers of L. monocytogenes were reduced by < 
. log CFU/mL when they were exposed to a mixture of milk and SGF with a pH value of . or .. The reductions of L. monocytogenes in our study were smaller than previous studies using the static in vitro human gastric models which had a  to  log CFU/mL reduction . This observation demonstrates that L. monocytogenes exposed to a dynamic simulated gastric environment with a pH gradient may develop enhanced acid resistance through the adaptive acid tolerance response  . 
The AATR in L. monocytogenes can be activated by exposing cells to a mildly acidic environment which could upregulate the expression of acid stress response related genes that allow the cells to survive the lethal acidic environment . This AATR system has shown to be partially alternative sigma B independent in L. monocytogenes  and involves at least  regulatory responses such as the glutamate decarboxylase system  FFATPase and SOS system. These regulatory systems are responsible for consuming or transporting intracellular H+ outside of the cells and for repairing damaged proteins and genetic materials. Some of the systems may have contributed to a higher survival rate of L. monocytogenes in this study e.g. .   .   as compared to other studies using the static human gastric models e.g. < . .  
The survival of L. monocytogenes was evaluated using both selective  and nonselective  agar to detect sublethally injured cells. Selective agars for L. monocytogenes such as Oxford Palcam or ALOA agar can suppress the growth of membranedamaged cells due to the presence of subinhibitory concentrations of salts such as sodium chloride bile salts etc. which can apply additional osmotic stress to the cells to prevent their growth . Thus the difference in the plate counts obtained from selective and nonselective agars could indicate the presence of sublethally injured cells. 
In this study there was no significant difference  between the plate counts of L. 
monocytogenes obtained from Oxford and BHI agar throughout the h exposure across all sampling time points when the SGF with a pH value of . or .  was used. The exposure of L. monocytogenes to acidic environment such as with a pH range between 
. to . may not be lethal enough to cause sublethal damage to the cells due to the development of enhanced acid tolerance in L. monocytogenes. Similar findings were reported by BarmpaliaDavis et al.  and Ramalheira et al.  who examined the survival of L. monocytogenes under static simulated gastric conditions using SGF pH . and SGF pH . respectively. They suggested that the inability to cause injury to cells by the acid was likely due to strain variation and potential acid adaptation. Interestingly in our study there was a . to . log CFU/mL difference  between the recovery methods at the sampling time t =  h when all three strains were exposed to the milk and the SGF pH . mixture. These findings may indicate that the exposure of L. monocytogenes to a lethal acidic environment for  min  could produce sublethally injured cells.  
For the dynamic simulated gastric environment with the mixture of milkSGF pH . and milkSGF pH . starting from  log CFU/mL for all  strains the numbers of L. monocytogenes were only reduced by . to . log CFU/mL after a h exposure. Similarly researchers examined the survival of  L. monocytogenes strains in a dynamic in vitro stomach model where the pH of the gastric content was adjusted from . to . during a h exposure. Seven out of the  strains also had a <  log reduction after the exposure ; the other  strains of L. monocytogenes demonstrated a  to log reduction during the last  min of the exposure at pH .. The authors suggested that theses strains might be less acidtolerant in nature as compared to others. Similar trends were observed in this study when all strains were exposed to a mixture of milk and SGF pH . . There was a < . log CFU/mL reduction during the first  min of exposure followed by a . to . log CFU/mL reduction during the last  min . These results may demonstrate that pH . or . might be a lethal pH for L. monocytogenes strains; the strains may reach their tolerance thresholds and the enhanced acid resistance developed during the first  min of the exposure can no longer protect the cells from getting injured. In addition the serotype /a strain from our study appeared to be the most acidtolerant strain when exposed to the SGF pH . but became the most acidsensitive strain when exposed to the SGF pH .. This observation also supports our previous hypothesis that L. monocytogenes may have an acid tolerance threshold and pH . seems to be a lethal pH for all three strains tested. The results obtained from both studies suggest that the gastric acidity is likely a key factor influencing the survival of L. monocytogenes.  
In contrast a study conducted by Barretta and colleagues  demonstrated a  to  log CFU/mL reduction of L. monocytogenes strain ATCC   after a  min exposure to the stomach compartment of a dynamic in vitro simulated human GI model with the pH value of the simulated gastric mixture being adjusted from . to . every  min. The discrepancies in the results may be due to the following reasons  strain variation within the same serotype of L. monocytogenes as was found by BarmpaliaDavis et al.  and  different gastric pH profiles. The ATCC  strain was exposed to the environment with a pH value < . for  mins and  mins in our study; the pH from Barretta and colleagues was adjusted less frequently when the pH < .  than that of our study . Comparing the strain with serotype /a tested in our study the ATCC  was exposed to the environment with a similar pH value for a longer period of time and thus would result in a larger reduction in levels of L. monocytogenes.  
Previous studies have suggested that the survival of L. monocytogenes in a simulated human stomach model seemed to be straindependent since the strains displayed various degrees of susceptibility to gastric acidity . BarmpaliaDavis et al.  also showed that the survival of L. monocytogenes was dependent on the gastric digestion time because a longer gastric exposure could lead to a greater reduction in bacterial numbers. In our study we found that the survival of L. monocytogenes in the simulated human stomach was dependent on four factors namely the gastric digestion/emptying time gastric acidity L. monocytogenes strain and recovery method  which were dependent on each other. It should be pointed out that the survival of L. monocytogenes was straindependent only at the sampling time point t = . h when the cells were exposed to the mixture of milk and SGF pH .. It is possible that  the AATR system was not fully activated by regulators such as the alternative Sigma B factor under the acidic conditions  during the first  min and  the acid tolerance of L. monocytogenes at this time point was likely to be dependent on its intrinsic acid resistance which may vary among strains. In addition the reduction in levels for all strains during the  to . h exposure in the mixture of milk and SGF pH 
. was higher  than the reductions observed at pH . and . . This observation may suggest that the development of the AATR is pH dependent and L. monocytogenes may need to be exposed to a more acidic environment to trigger and develop an 
AATR. 
 
. Induction and resuscitation of viablebutnonculturable  cells of L. 
monocytogenes  
.. Discrimination efficiency of the PMAxx dye  
The qPCR combined with a DNA intercalating dye  such as propidium monoazide  is commonly used to differentiate live and dead cells of both Grampositive and Gramnegative bacteria from environmental and food samples . In this study the PMAxx dye the second generation of the PMA dye was used because it provides a better discrimination efficiency than the original dye 
. 
Similar to other viability methods PMA/PMAxxqPCR also has its drawbacks with the problem of falsepositive results being the most important among them. A falsepositive result i.e. where the DNA of the dead cells is not completely suppressed can occur due to several reasons including but not limited to:  the presence of the dead cells with intact membranes; these cells can prevent the PMA dye from penetrating into the cell membrane   the concentration of the dye is not high enough to bind to all the DNA of the dead cells  and  the presence of short  qPCR amplicons . Several studies have found an amplicon lengthdependent effect of qPCR coupled with the DNA intercalating dye. Longer amplicons  could enhance the PMAqPCR suppression efficiency of the DNA of the dead cells by  
  cycles . Soejima et al.  found that DNA amplification from dead cells of L. monocytogenes was not completely suppressed by EMA PCR when using a shorter gene region which targets the hly gene. For the reasons mentioned above the Cq value of PMAtreated dead cells may be smaller than  cycles thus causing falsepositive results.  
To try and overcome the above issues several trials of PMAxxqPCR optimization were conducted. All bacterial samples were tested with brand A  filtered chocolate milk since it was the most complex food model used in this study . Although the gene hly was also used in this study the results demonstrated significant suppression of the DNA of the dead cells  of L. monocytogenes with insignificant effects on the DNA of the live cells . 
 
 
.. Quantification of L. monocytogenes in the VBNC state by culturebased method and PMAxxqPCR  
To evaluate whether L. monocytogenes can enter the viable but nonculturable  state under stress which is a type of dormant state in nonsporulating bacteria the culturedependent method is normally coupled with a method that measures bacterial viability. This is because culture media can only quantify culturable cells whereas the viability methods such as PMAxxqPCR allow for the quantification of culturable cells and cells in the VBNC state . If the cell number obtained from PMAxxqPCR is higher than the culturedependent method this is a good indication that VBNC cells may be present. 
In this study chlorine which is a common disinfectant used in dairy processing plants was used to induce L. monocytogenes into the VBNC state and whether these VBNC cells can resuscitate during storage was also evaluated. A fivestrain cocktail of L. monocytogenes including serotypes /a /b and b was subjected to a . ppm chlorine water solution for  min with gentle shaking. Both chlorinetreated and untreated  L. monocytogenes were evaluated for cell viability using the culturebased method  and the PMAxxqPCR after they were resuspended in brand A filtered  milk  chocolate milk and . milk. The  chocolate milk was selected instead of the  unflavoured milk because flavoured milks  have become a popular choice among Canadians since they are considered to be a heathier alternative compared to soda drinks; chocolate milk is the most popular milk beverage among other flavoured milk products  . In addition we were interested in examining the survival of L. monocytogenes in chocolate milk since two listeriosis outbreaks have been associated with this dairy product . 
The numbers of untreated  L. monocytogenes obtained from PMAxxqPCR and culturedependent methods were similar  indicating all viable cells were culturable. 
Likewise there was no significant difference  between the number of culturable cells of chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes obtained from Oxford and BHI agar. Therefore the culturable cell counts mentioned in this section refer to the L. monocytogenes colonies enumerated on BHI agar.  
The culturable cell counts obtained from chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes were below the limit of detection  in all milk products indicating that the cells were either inactivated or became VBNC. However L. monocytogenes was detected by PMAxxqPCR implying that the cells entered the VBNC state. Previous studies have reported that L. monocytogenes E. coli and H. pylori can enter the VBNC state using chlorine solution with similar concentrations i.e. ranging from  to  ppm .  
The numbers of viable cells in the  and . milk were detected but not quantified since the Cq values were greater than the upper bound of the calibration curves for quantification . Based on the values of the limit of quantification  and LOD  we can deduce that there might be approximately between . to . log CFU/mL of viable cells present and   log CFU/mL of cells were inactivated in the  and . milk during the chlorine exposure. Interestingly the number of viable cells  in the  chocolate milk was . log CFU/mL  which was higher than the number of viable cells obtained when L. monocytogenes was resuspended in the  and . milk. 
The discrepancy in the viable cell counts of chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes was unexpected since all samples were treated with chlorine following the identical protocol before they were resuspended in the milk products. After resuspension all samples were processed as quickly as possible and subjected to plating and PMAxx treatment. However it is possible that there may have been an effect on the samples from residual chlorine i.e. although all treated L. monocytogenes samples were centrifuged and resuspended in three milk products there might have been trace amounts of chlorine residual present in the milk which could have caused bactericidal activities during the sample processing period .  
A greater number of viable cells of chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes was found in the  chocolate milk  as compared to the  and . milk . This observation may be due to the effects of the different food ingredients present in these three milk products which was demonstrated in one of our studies  examining the survival of L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk under simulated human gastric conditions. Similarly the survival of L. monocytogenes inoculated into  chocolate milk was also the highest among the milk products tested in this study. Other than the traditional nutrient composition of milk chocolate milk contains additional ingredients such as sugar cocoa powder carrageenan etc. that may promote the growth of microorganisms . A more indepth discussion regarding the effects of chocolate milk ingredients on the survival of L. monocytogenes can be found in section ... It is possible that some of the inhibitory effects of chlorine on L. monocytogenes may be neutralized by the ingredients present in the  chocolate milk. It is well known that organic materials can interfere with the antimicrobial activity of disinfectants such as chlorine. This interference can occur by a chemical reaction between chlorine and the organic material resulting in a complex that is less germicidal or nongermicidal and/or by the organic material protecting bacteria via acting as a physical barrier. 
A variety of methods have been tested to resuscitate L. monocytogenes from the VBNC state e.g. a temperature upshift the addition of sodium pyruvate Tween  Tween  or the use of chicken embryonated eggs . However only the chick embryonated eggs have been found to resuscitate the cells in the VBNC state.  
In our study the resuscitation temperature was chosen to be  since the objective was to evaluate whether VBNC cells of L. monocytogenes could resuscitate under refrigeration conditions to mimic dairy contamination. After  h of incubation at  in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk culturable cells of L. monocytogenes were found on BHI agar in all samples with the cell counts in the  milk being the highest . log CFU/mL followed by . and  milk . To the best of my knowledge we found for the first time that L. monocytogenes cells in the VBNC state can be resuscitated after  h of incubation at  in milk products. This finding highlights a potential benefit of detecting VBNC cells in fluid dairy products before they are released into the market as the VBNC cells may be able to resuscitate and grow at refrigeration temperature thus posing a health risk to the public especially the highrisk groups.  
As one of the few psychrotrophic food pathogens it is evident that L. monocytogenes can survive and grow at  . Thus findings from this study may be the result of a combination of the cold tolerance of L. monocytogenes and the addition of nutrients in the milk. Similarly a study conducted by Rao et al.  demonstrated that V. vulnificus in the VBNC state also showed signs of resuscitation in the cold i.e.  and . Both of these findings as well as ours suggest that some foodborne pathogens in the VBNC state may be able to resuscitate and grow at low temperatures which could cause food safety concerns for refrigerated products.   
Compared to the total numbers of viable cells detected in the  chocolate milk . and  milk by PMAxxqPCR  after the chorine treatment the resuscitated cells from  chocolate milk . and  milk were detected at lower concentrations  which may indicate that not all viable cells were resuscitated within  h.  
We speculate that the observations mentioned in the above paragraph could be explained by strain variation. A majority of studies examined the behaviour of single strains of L. monocytogenes instead of a combination of strains of different serotypes. This study used a fivestrain cocktail of L. monocytogenes to account for variation in growth and survival among different strains . In fact it is known that the resuscitation efficiency of bacteria can be straindependent e.g. several studies have reported various resuscitation conditions and periods for strains of E. coli Vibro harveyi and Campylobacter jejuni . The resuscitation efficiency also seems to be dependent on the induction conditions and the age of the VBNC cells . Therefore in this study it is possible that the resuscitated cells may have only come from  or  of the strains in the cocktail and that cells from the other strains that were still in the VBNC state may have needed a longer incubation period or more optimum resuscitation conditions to be revived. 
In this study the level of resuscitated cells of L. monocytogenes in the  chocolate milk after the chlorine treatment was the highest followed by . and  milk i.e. . . and . log CFU/mL respectively. This finding may demonstrate the effects of nutrients on the resuscitation efficiency of cells in the VBNC state which have been reported in previous studies . The VBNC cells of L. monocytogenes resuspended in the  chocolate milk would have had access to more carbon sources  especially sugars; the sugar content of the 
 chocolate milk is almost  higher than that of the  and . milk . In previous studies researchers have successfully resuscitated Gramnegative and Grampositive bacteria in the VBNC state using rich agar/liquid media containing carbon sources such as glucose and sodium pyruvate .  
Masuda et al.  found that metal cofactors such as iron can play an important role in the resuscitation of VBNC cells; among  different resuscitation methods the VBNC cells of Tenacibaculum sp. strain F only resuscitated after the addition of . of iron chloride  and a temperature upshift from  to . Metal cofactors are involved in a variety of cellular biological processes in bacteria such as transcription respiration and responses to stresses etc. . A study has demonstrated that the VBNC cells of V. vulnificus constantly express genes that are involved in metal ion transportation such as iron and magnesium . In our study the  chocolate milk contains .  of iron which is  times higher than that of the  and . milk . Therefore it is possible that the iron from the chocolate milk could have contributed to the resuscitation of L. monocytogenes in the VBNC state although the concentration of iron is lower than that used in the study by Masuda et al. .  
The difference in the levels of resuscitated cells of L. monocytogenes in the  and . milk could also be due to the percentage of milk fat in the . milk. Furthermore catalase which appears to help the resuscitation of bacteria in the VBNC state is commonly found in raw bovine milk . However catalase would likely not contribute to cell resuscitation in this case as this enzyme is inactivated during pasteurization .  
 
 
 
.. Survival of resuscitated L. monocytogenes in milk products during storage  
After  h of resuscitation chlorinetreated L. monocytogenes samples continued to be stored at  for  days to observe the potential growth of resuscitated cells in all three milk products. There was no significant change  in the levels of L. monocytogenes inoculated into  and . milk during this storage period. This may suggest that  cells may still have been undergoing recovery and  that it may be harder to repair cells at low temperatures such as  . It is possible that the population of L. monocytogenes may have increased if the incubation period was extended for several weeks.  
In contrast a significant increase  in the levels of resuscitated L. monocytogenes cells was observed in the  chocolate milk by the end of the storage period. This may have been due to the additional nutrients present in the chocolate milk as compared to the regular milk samples mentioned above. The growth of L. monocytogenes may have been due to the growth of resuscitated cells and/or resuscitation and growth of the VBNC cells which is difficult to verify. There was a small increase in the levels of L. monocytogenes  during the first  days of incubation. This is likely due to the slow growth rate of L. monocytogenes at refrigeration temperature i.e. . log CFU/ml/h . In one of our preliminary studies L. monocytogenes in the VBNC state was able to resuscitate at  and reach 
approximately  log CFU/mL within  h of incubation.  
For nonchlorine treated L. monocytogenes the level of culturable cells  was the highest in the  chocolate milk  followed by the  and . milk  which saw L. monocytogenes increase in numbers from approximately . to . log CFU/mL. Rosenow and Marth  found that the growth of L. monocytogenes caused by the addition of sugar cocoa powder and carrageenan in the skim milk was not statistically different from the growth of L. monocytogenes in the skim milk. However it seems that the additional ingredients in the chocolate milk can affect the growth of L. monocytogenes significantly if the ingredients are added at higher concentrations as demonstrated in our study. It should be noted that the sugar content of the   chocolate milk used in our study is almost  higher than the samples used in the study by Rosenow and Marth . Although the levels of cocoa powder and carrageenan from the  chocolate milk are unknown they may be present at higher concentrations.  
The growth of untreated L. monocytogenes inoculated into the  and . milk was similar indicating that the milk fat content may not play an important role in supporting better growth of the organism. Likewise Rosenow and Marth  also came up with the same conclusion when they examined the growth of L. monocytogenes in  and . milk at   and . Other studies have shown that the milk fat content may have little or no effect on the growth of L. monocytogenes in butter and yogurts with various fat contents . However as demonstrated in one of our studies  it is worth mentioning that the milk fat content may play a significant role in the survival of stressed cells of L. monocytogenes. 
 
 
 
. Effect of milk fat content on the survival of L. monocytogenes under simulated human gastric conditions  
.. Quantification of L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk under simulated gastric exposure using a culturedependent method  
It is wellestablished that food matrixes could influence the survival and growth of bacteria . Thus it is likely that the structural and compositional elements of the food may also affect the hostpathogen interaction and establishment of infection of pathogens as they travel through the human GI tract. In this study the milk fat content was evaluated to determine whether it can influence the survival of L. monocytogenes under simulated human gastric conditions and whether L. monocytogenes can be induced into the VBNC state during the exposure. A fivestrain cocktail of L. monocytogenes  was exposed to a mixture of SGF pH . and each of the following three milk products  milk  chocolate milk and . milk for  h with the pH value of the mixture being adjusted from . to . throughout the exposure to mimic gradual gastric acidification.  
There was no significant difference in the survival of L. monocytogenes obtained from BHI and Oxford agar across all sampling time points indicating that the number of sublethally injured cells produced due to the addition of acid was insignificant. This study demonstrated that milk fat content can affect the survival of L. monocytogenes and it was dependent on gastric acidity and gastric digestion time with the largest effect being observed during the last  min of exposure.  
The levels of L. monocytogenes decreased in all three milk products over the h exposure. During the last  min of exposure the reductions in the numbers of L. monocytogenes were significantly different among all three milk products  with the survival of L. monocytogenes being the highest in the  chocolate milk followed by . and  milk which contained . . and . log CFU/mL of L. monocytogenes respectively. Similar results were obtained throughout the second hour of exposure . These findings indicated that the milk fat content may not be a key factor contributing to the survival of L. monocytogenes in this study. 
Interestingly the additional ingredients from the chocolate milk such as sugar cocoa powder and carrageenan have previously been shown to either support or inhibit the growth of L. monocytogenes . 
Sugar cocoa powder and carrageenan from chocolate milk provide carbon sources e.g. 
glucose lactose sucrose etc. which can be taken up by L. monocytogenes through the phosphotransferase system and metabolized via carbon catabolic pathways to generate energy both aerobically and anaerobically . Similar to regular/unflavoured milk chocolate milk also contains various milk fat components. The lipids  can be catabolized via betaoxidation for energy synthesis .  
Rosenow and Marth  examined the survival of L. monocytogenes in inoculated skim whole and chocolate milk at   and . Although the growth rates of L. monocytogenes were similar for all products the levels of L. monocytogenes in the chocolate milk were the highest for most of the four strains tested regardless of the temperature of incubation . Similar results were reported by Kenney and Beuchat  i.e. higher levels of 
L. monocytogenes were found in inoculated chocolate milk as compared to whole fat milk at  
after  h of incubation . 
In contrast some studies have demonstrated that ingredients such as caffeine and theobromine from cocoa powder and some fatty acids from milk lipids could inhibit the growth of L. monocytogenes . Pearson and Marth  evaluated the effects of caffeine  and theobromine  which are two major alkaloids found in cocoa powder on the growth of L. monocytogenes in bovine skim milk. A longer lag phase and generation time of L. monocytogenes were found in samples containing caffeine caffeine and theobromine as compared to samples without caffeine . They also found that samples containing  caffeine could reduce L. monocytogenes to an undetected level  in the skim milk. These findings indicate that the addition of  . caffeine and  . theobromine in skim milk may inhibit the growth of L. monocytogenes.  
In this study a greater survival of L. monocytogenes in the  chocolate milk  as compared to the  and . milk may be due to the additional nutrients such as sugar  cocoa powder and carrageenan from the chocolate milk which can stimulate the growth of L. monocytogenes causing a smaller reduction in the level of cells during the gastric simulation. The inhibitory effects of caffeine and theobromine against L. monocytogenes likely play an insignificant role in this study as they are present in relatively low amounts. In fact given there are approximately <  mg of theobromine and <  mg of caffeine in  gram of cocoa powder and usually <  of cocoa powder is added to chocolate milk  there might be < . of caffeine and < . of theobromine present in the  chocolate milk which are significantly lower than the concentrations tested in the study by Pearson and Marth .  
One study showed that the addition of cane sugar  cocoa powder  and carrageenan  in  bovine milk caused a subtle increase in the level of L. monocytogenes and the difference in growth was not statistically significant . The discrepancy in the effects of sugar cocoa power and carrageenan on the growth of L. monocytogenes between our study and that of Rosenow and Marth may be due to the presence of higher concentrations of nutrients especially sugars in our study.  
Milk lipids consist of both long and short chain fatty acids which can exhibit antibacterial properties . Sprong et al.  found that  to  of the milk fatty acids e.g. C: C: C: C: C: exhibited excellent in vitro killing capacity against L. monocytogenes and S. Enteritidis with L. monocytogenes being more sensitive to the treatment  as compared to S. Enteritidis . In addition a high milk fat  diet resulted in a higher reduction  in the numbers of L. monocytogenes in the stomach of rats than that of a low fat  diet. This is potentially due to a higher concentration of antibacterial lipids coming from the high milk fat diet . In our study the fatty acids e.g. C: C: C: etc. which can exhibit listeriacidal effects appears to be present at low concentrations in the  chocolate milk i.e.< .  and thus may not demonstrate significant inhibitory effects on the survival of L. monocytogenes. 
In contrast to the study which demonstrated that a higher milk fat content could exhibit a better antimicrobial effect against L. monocytogenes in the stomach of rats  our study showed the opposite i.e. there was a greater reduction of L. monocytogenes population in the  milk as compared to . milk during the last  min of the simulated human gastric exposure. This observation could be explained by:  L. monocytogenes is capable of catabolizing milk lipids which could promote the growth and survival of L. monocytogenes  and  in general the fat droplets dispersed in the milk are . to  ?m in diameter and this is larger than the dimensions of L. monocytogenes  . Consequently bacteria could be entrapped in these hydrophobic lipids which provide a physical barrier and protect the cells from lethal acid killing . Overall it seems that the nutritional value of and physical protection resulting from the milk fat may outweigh its inhibitory effects on the pathogen causing less bacteria to be inactivated in the . milk as compared to the  milk at the end of the simulated gastric exposure. 
Interestingly a study by BarmpaliaDavis et al.  showed that the milk fat effects on L. monocytogenes survival were observed mainly after  to  min of simulated gastric exposure which are similar to our results. It is likely that the enhanced acid tolerance developed by L. monocytogenes during the first  min of the sublethal acid exposure allowed the bacteria to survive the lethal acid exposure. However L. monocytogenes may reach its acid tolerance threshold during the last  min of the exposure to a pH . environment and cause significant reductions in the levels of L. monocytogenes. As demonstrated in our study the amount of the decrease in levels of L. monocytogenes seems to be dependent on the milk fat content. 
.. Quantification of L. monocytogenes in  milk  chocolate milk and . milk under simulated gastric exposure using PMAxxqPCR  
To evaluate whether the simulated human gastric conditions can induce L. monocytogenes to enter the VBNC state samples were collected across all sampling time points and subjected to PMAxxqPCR for viability evaluation. The PMAxxqPCR method measures the total numbers of viable cells including culturable cells and cells that are in the VBNC state whereas the culturedependent method only measures the total number of culturable cells. 
A majority of cells remained viable during the first hour of the exposure to pH .  . since no significant changes in the levels of L. monocytogenes were observed. There were no significant differences between the culturable and viable cell counts of L. monocytogenes inoculated into the  milk and  chocolate at t =  h indicating that all viable cells were culturable. However there was a significant difference between the numbers of culturable and viable cells in the . milk at t =  h with the numbers of culturable cells being approximately  log CFU/mL higher. Similar results were observed across all samples collected during the second hour of the exposure to pH .. This observation was unexpected since the level of viable cells should be equal to or greater than that of culturable cells because both culturable cells and cells that are in the VBNC state are considered as viable cells. 
The discrepancy highlighted above could have been caused by technical problems due to the addition of HCl acid during the simulated gastric exposure. All milk products showed various degrees of protein denaturation after pH adjustment except at the sampling time point t =  h where no acid was added. Although there were protein floccules formed at t = h samples collected from  milk and  chocolate milk at that time point were not significantly affected.  
During the second hour of exposure we expected a significant degree of protein denaturation since the pH value of the mixture was lowered to approximately . prior to sample collections. Interestingly all the h samples which were subjected to the PMAxx treatment had less precipitations as compared to samples collected at t =  and  h. This observation may help explain why less viable cells were found at t = . and  h by PMAxxqPCR. It is possible that the bacteria may have bound to the denatured food components or became trapped in the food components which were soluble in the milk samples causing less bacteria to be pelleted out during centrifugation.  
Barretta and colleagues  evaluated the viability of L. monocytogenes strain ATCC  on raw salmon fillets under human in vitro GI conditions using both culturedependent and PMAqPCR methods. Starting from low and high concentrations of L. monocytogenes  almost the entire population of cells entered the VBNC state after they were exposed to the simulated stomach compartment with or without the presence of the salmon fillet. The VBNC state of L. monocytogenes was maintained before they exited the duodenum and became culturable as they traveled through the ileum and colon. In contrast in our study there was at least 
 log CFU/mL of culturable cells of the fivestrain cocktail of L. monocytogenes  found in all milk products after the h simulated gastric exposure. The differences in results obtained could be due to variations in the bacterial strain gastric pH and gastric digestion time which can influence the survival of L. monocytogenes under simulated human gastric conditions as demonstrated in our studies as well as previous ones .  
 
 
. Aerobic microbial profile of commercial filtered bovine milk  
The identities and levels of aerobes from Brand A and B filtered milk were determined for the purpose of selecting the food model used for this thesis work. All milk samples were cultured on blood agar for a day aerobic incubation including  days of incubation at  and room temperature  respectively to detect psychrotrophs mesophiles and fungi from the milk. The blood agar is an enriched media that allows for the cultivation of fastidious microorganisms and differentiation of colonies based on morphology . It is widely used for microbial profile determination in foods such as milk tofu vegetables and meats .  
Two spoilage bacterial species were isolated from brand A and B milk Microbacterium and Anoxybacillus. Microbacterium is one of the spoilage bacteria commonly found in fresh raw milk . It is a Grampositive heat tolerant sporeformer that can survive the pasteurization process . It was the most abundant bacterial species isolated from  and  retail filtered milk products in Germany Austria and Switzerland with a relatively lower spoilage potential as compared to other spoilage bacteria such as Bacillus spp. and Panibacillus spp. which were isolated from more than  of the spoiled milk samples .  
Anoxybacillus spp. such as A. flavithermus are thermophilic sporeformers and biofilmformers that are commonly found in the milk processing plants . It is challenging to eliminate A. flavithermus from the milk products or dairy processing plants since it has a fast growth rate and is able to tolerate heat and form biofilms . A. flavithermus is the dominant thermophile found in milk powder manufacturing plants worldwide . Although they are not pathogenic high numbers of Anoxybacillus spp. in milk are unacceptable since they can cause deterioration in milk quality due to the production of acids or enzymes . 
The aerobic plate counts  obtained from both Brand A and B filtered milk were low i.e. <  to  CFU/mL. Similar to our study previous studies have also reported <  to . CFU/mL of APCs in some commercial filtered milk products . Filtered milk in general has a lower microbial load and longer shelf life as compared to pasteurized milk since the milk is filtered through a membrane with a pore size of .   ?m to remove a majority of microorganisms and debris prior to paseturization . 
 
. Limitations and future studies  
We acknowledge that there were several limitations in our studies. The inoculum level of L. monocytogenes was high i.e.  log CFU/mL in all studies which is different from the reallife contamination levels of pathogen in foods i.e.  to  log CFU/mL . Using the inoculum at a high concentration allows ones to observe the trend of bacterial behaviours under the treatment and obtain results when the detection/quantification limit of a method is relatively low.  
Although our study used the SHIME which provides a better simulation of the in vivo human stomach than static selfassembled models there are still some dynamic aspects of digestion missing as compared to the in vivo stomach e.g. the transition of the gastric content to the following compartment during the gastric exposure. In our study bovine milk was used as the food model and our results could potentially be referenced to explain the behaviour of L. monocytogenes in other nonclear liquid foods in the human stomach but not solid foods since the gastric digestion time and the change of gastric acidity over time are likely to be foodmatrix dependent.  
To stop the effect of chlorine on L. monocytogenes and prevent cell loss from repeated resuspension samples were directly resuspended in the milk products after the chlorine treatment. However this action may not completely end the radical reaction as trace amounts of chlorine residue could have been present and exhibit bactericidal activities. Quenching agents such as sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate can be added to neutralize chlorine residue before proceeding to downstream applications . In addition a more stringent resuscitation validation protocol should be included in future studies. For instance the MPN  technique could be used to eliminate the possibility of recovery from a small amount of undetectable culturable cells during resuscitation . 
The effect of bovine milk fat content with a range of  to . on the survival of L. 
monocytogenes was evaluated under simulated human gastric exposure in this study. Future studies with other solid dairy products containing a similar or higher milk fat content in the solid form such as cheese butter etc. would be very interesting since the physical structure of the component might also play an important role in effecting the behaviour of pathogens.  
The SHIME related experiments can be performed to further evaluate the survival of L. 
monocytogenes as it travels through the entire simulated human GI tract in the presence of the food matrix to have a more reliable estimate of the level of viable cells that may be needed to initiate infection in the small intestine. In addition examining the expression of stresscoping and virulence genes of L. monocytogenes in a simulation of the human GI tract at transcriptomic and proteomic levels can advance our understanding of crossprotection mechanisms used by L. monocytogenes which may promote the survival of the pathogen in the intestine thus facilitating the establishment of an infection.  
Since there is still uncertainty regarding the health risk posed by cells of L. monocytogenes in the VBNC state the VBNC study could be expanded to evaluate the virulence potential of VBNC cells before and after resuscitation using human cell lines or animal models. One could also examine the identity of cells  in the VBNC state using celltracking techniques such as flow cytometry since a recent study found that persister cells can also enter and be resuscitated from the VBNC state . In addition future studies could be done to look for the presence and resuscitation potential of VBNC cells in a wide variety of RTE foods e.g. dried heat treated HPPtreated acidic foods etc. to determine the practicality of incorporating the cell viability method into routine microbial safety testing in food processing plants. 
 
 

After samples were collected from the SHIME treatment vessels they were transported on an ice box to minimize RNA degradation. Freshly prepared refrigerated  phenolethanol  solution was added to the sample immediately in :  ratio  to protect RNA from degradation . Samples were left overnight  at 
 to allow solution to thoroughly penetrate the bacteria. The following day samples were pelleted by centrifugation at  x g for  min and flashfreezed at  for  min using an ultralow freezer . All pelleted samples were stored at  and ready for RNA isolation. 
L. monocytogenes RNA extraction method was developed and modified according to several studies  and the protocols from the commercial isolation kit Qiagen RNeasy mini kit and SigmaAldrich TRIzol reagent. A total of  culture samples  and  L. monocytogenes inoculated milk samples  were tested to optimize the yield and quality of RNA over a course of five months. The purpose of including culture samples for optimization of RNA extraction is to provide guidance and insights on isolating RNA of L. monocytogenes from the food samples which is more challenging than culture samples due to the presence of complex food components. 
Unfortunately none of the methods could yield high quality and quantity of L. 
monocytogenes RNA isolated from the food samples. However the quality of RNA isolated from culture samples had improved from RINe  . to .. Table B. demonstrates the progress of optimization of L. monocytogenes RNA extraction over a course of five months. All extraction methods with major modifications that were tested on culture and food samples are summarized in the Table. The extraction method that yielded the highest quality of RNA in food samples #   is described below.  
The first part of the protocol was developed mainly based on the SigmaAldrich TRIzol reagent user guide. All volatile and toxic organic solvents were handled with engineering control and the use of Personal Protective Equipment. Frozen sample pellets were first thawed in . mL of cold  TRIzol  at room temperature and then transferred to a  mL safelock tube containing  mg of preweighted . mm Zirconia/Silica beads  for mechanical disruption. The cells were mechanically disrupted using Genie cell disrupter  for two cycles of min each with min cooling on armour beads between the cycles.  Samples were then centrifuged for a short spin  to pull the beads to the bottom and the supernatant was then transferred to a new tube containing . mL of cold TRIzol reagent and vortexed gently. To remove the fat component samples were centrifuged at 
 × g at  for  min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube after the fat layer that was floating on the top of the supernatant was discarded. After  min of incubation at room temperature cold P.C.I  reagent was added to the sample in :  ratio to partition RNA from DNA protein and other organic matters. The sample was shaken vigorously after incubated for  min at room temperature then centrifuged at   x g at  for  min. The mixture was separated into a lower red phenolchloroform phase a cloudy interphase and a clear upper aqueous phase. The clear aqueous phase which contained RNA was transferred into a new tube. The same step was repeated using chloroform instead of P.C.I to purify and remove the organic solvent from the sample. After the clear aqueous phase was obtained an equal volume of ice cold   ethanol was added to the sample.  
Following manufactures recommendations Qiagen RNeasy mini kit  was used for the second half of the RNA extraction to purify RNA samples further. Briefly the sample obtained from the first half of RNA extraction were first eluted onto the RNeasy Mini spin column and oncolumn Dnase treatment was applied using RNasefree DNase Set  to remove potential contaminant DNA from the sample. After several washing steps using buffer 
RW and RPE RNA was eluted in RNasefree water and stored at  until needed. The quality of all RNA samples was measured with the NanoDrop  spectrophotometer  using NanoDrop  Software v.. and submitted to AAC for a comprehensive RNA quality assessment using TapeStation software.  
A twostep RTqPCR was carried out for complementary DNA  conversion and cDNA quantification. RNA was first reversely transcribed to cDNA using Invitrogen SuperScript 
VILO cDNA synthesis kit . For each reaction   of X 
VILO Reaction Mix   of X Superscript Enzyme Mix   of RNA sample were mixed with 
  of DEPCtreated water to have a final volume of  . The mixture was then incubated at  for  min  for  min followed by  for  min to terminate the reaction. The quality of the cDNA sample was measured by NanoDrop  spectrophotometer. All cDNA samples were stored at   until needed. 
qPCR reactions were performed using the CFX TouchTM ReaTime PCR Detection System  in HardShell well skirted PCR plates . The final reagent concentrations were determined and optimized based on PowerUp™ SYBR™ Green Master Mix user guide. Each PCR reaction had a final volume of   including   of RNA template X 
PowerUpTM  SYBRTM  Green master mix . ?M forward and reverse primers rpoB gap gadD . Two commonly used L. monocytogenes housekeeping genes rpoB and gap and one wellknown acidcoping gene gadD were selected to optimize the qPCR protocol . qPCR conditions were as follows: UDG activation at  for  min; DualLockTM DNA polymerase activation at  for  min;  cycles of  for  sec and  for  sec followed by a melt curve from  to . qPCR reactions were conducted in technical triplicate including both the experimental samples and notemplate controls.  Data was processed and analyzed using BioRad CFX Maestro software . 
 
B. Results and discussion  
 
Ninetyeight samples were used to optimize the RNA extraction protocol of L. 
monocytogenes  in BHI culture and inoculated milk samples. Since RNA is highly labile and degradable in nature assessing the quality of the RNA is necessary to obtain accurate results from the downstream analyses. The quality/integrity of RNA is commonly represented by RNA Integrity Number equivalent  value ranging from   to   . One of the commonly used methods to evaluate RNA quality is using gel electrophoresis which separates two major bacterial ribosomal RNAs s and s; the RNA is considered of high quality when the image shows two neat s and s bands without degradation and the ratio of s/s is between . to . . In general RNA samples with RINe value  to  can be used for analyses such as whole genome sequencing or gene expression. . 
The quality and quantity of the RNA  is highly dependent on the three factors listed below:  Cell type. Compared to Gramnegative bacteria the RNA from the Grampositive bacteria are more difficult to be extracted as the thick peptidoglycan layer of Grampositive bacteria offers a higher rigidity to cell disruption and prevent the RNA stabilization reagent from penetrating into the cells . In addition the physiological state of cells can also affect RNA extraction efficiency. RNA extracted from cells in the midlog phase has higher quality and yields as compared to that of cells in the stationary phase since the levels of RNA from cells in the midlog phase are the highest primarily due to high metabolic activity and faster generation time ;  Environment. The environment in which the bacteria are suspended also plays an important role in the RNA extraction efficiency. The ideal environment for cells that are subjected to RNA extraction is minimal media as they have less variations than the complex media and contain less inhibitory compounds that may interfere with the downstream applications.  Extraction method. The RNA extraction method involves four major steps . RNA stabilization . cell lysis . purification  precipitation. Each step can affect the RNA extraction efficiency significantly if the reagent to sample volume ratio is not optimized.  
This study focused on optimizing the RNA extraction method since the cell type and the environment cannot be changed due to the nature of this project which was examining the gene expression of L. monocytogenes in the stationary phase in bovine milk under simulated human gastric conditions. Table B. listed the key optimisation steps of the RNA extraction method which can influence RNA extraction efficiency.   
After tested on  samples the quality of the RNA of L. monocytogenes isolated from BHI culture samples had improved from RINe . to . using the method performed on sample #. The significant improvement of the quality of RNA of cells inoculated in BHI medium samples may be due to a combination of factors with the selection of RNA stabilization reagent cell disruption and RNA collection method being the most influential factors based on the results obtained.  
In this study samples of L. monocytogenes with serotype /a collected from a h exposure to  milk and SGF with a pH of . at t = . h were used to optimize the RNA extraction protocol for food samples since these samples could represent a majority of acidified SHIME samples. Unfortunately the method which worked the best for the BHI culture samples did not work well for the food samples. Although there was still no RINe number assigned to the samples after optimization  the quality of L. monocytogenes RNA extracted from the inoculated milk had been improved from no bands to two faint bacterial ribosomal RNA s and s bands with minor contaminations shown on the gel image. However the quality of the RNA extracted from milk samples was not good enough for the downstream analysis such as RTPCR since the RINe numbers were < ..  
Low quality RNA samples may indicate that the addition of acid and/or the properties of denatured food components caused by the acid may be the key factors affecting the RNA extraction efficiency as the SHIME sample t =  h  has a good quality of RNA . It is also possible that the addition of the RNA stabilizing reagent may not fully protect the RNA from degradation due to the low acidity environment. Future studies could focus on evaluating and identifying which components from the milk product might affect the RNA extraction efficiency.  

 
B. Induction of VBNC cells trial  and  
 
The fivestrain cocktail of L. monocytogenes was exposed to the chlorine water solution at various concentrations .      ppm and a control  for  min of vigorously shaking. After resuspended in . PW  mL of sample was taken from each treatment and subjected to plating and PMA treatment followed by DNA extraction and PMAqPCR. A side experiment was running in parallel to evaluate if the sample mixing speed would influence the survival of L. monocytogenes. 

The results in the section A of Table B. indicated that there were culturable cells present in  .   and  ppm chlorine and the levels of the cells were . . . . and . log CFU/mL respectively. No culturable cells were found in  ppm chlorine. The calibration curve for PMAxxqPCR was not prepared as the goal of this preliminary experiment was to identify the condition that may induce the cells to enter the VBNC state i.e. the VBNC cells should be detected by qPCR but not by the conventional plating method. Based on the Cq values shown in Table B. the viable cells seemed not to be detected by PMAxxqPCR when there was < . log CFU/mL of culturable cells present in the sample. The results also suggested that instead of using . PW  an alternative liquid media should be used for DNA extraction of L. monocytogenes to improve the limit of detection.  
The mixing speed test showed  that sample mixing speed could influence the survival of L. monocytogenes in chlorine. Since gently mixing L. monocytogenes with . . . or  ppm chlorine could yield similar but more consistent results as compared to vigorously mixing L. monocytogenes with  or  ppm chlorine thus the  min gentle mixing speed was chosen for 
trial #.  
Table B. demonstrated the results of the induction and resuscitation of VBNC cells of L. 
monocytogenes. Cells were exposed to  to  ppm chlorine solutions for  min gentle mixing and resuscitated in . milk for  h at . The levels of L. monocytogenes treated with   . . and  ppm chlorine were . . . and . log CFU/mL respectively. There were no culturable cells detected in . ppm chlorine solution. After  h of resuscitation in . milk samples were taken across all treatments and plated onto Oxford and BHI agar in duplicates without serial dilutions to check for the presence of VBNC cells. The numbers of culturable cells were too numerous to count  across all treatments on both Oxford and BHI agar. Compared to other chlorine treatments gently mixing L. monocytogenes with . ppm chlorine for  min was most likely to induce L. monocytogenes to enter the VBNC state since the cells became culturable after resuscitation. 
 	iii 

 	iii 





 	iii 







 	2 
 

 	1 
 



 	 
 

















 	16 
 

 	17 
 



 	 
 





 	15 

 	15 



 	15 

