Chapter  Summary and Conclusions  
This thesis examined the survival of L. monocytogenes under acid or chlorine stress when suspended in fluid milk products in order to advance our understanding of the behaviour of L. monocytogenes under stress conditions. The main objectives of this thesis were to  evaluate the survival of L. monocytogenes in commercial filtered fluid bovine milk products in a simulation of the stomach of human adults and  determine whether L. monocytogenes can enter and be resuscitated from the viable but nonculturable  state under certain conditions.  
 Compared to static in vitro human gastric models computercontrolled dynamic digestion models such as the SHIME can provide a better simulation of human gastric conditions by including some dynamic aspects of digestion e.g. the pH changes over time that occur in the human stomach and the transition of chyme across different GI compartments. Thus results obtained from these models should better reflect the behaviour of pathogens in vivo. 
 The survival of L. monocytogenes which was evaluated under simulated human gastric conditions both as single strains and multistrain cocktails was mainly dependent on the gastric acidity and digestion time. This suggests that in general adults who have a lower acidity in the stomach i.e. a higher pH and/or shorter gastric digestion time could be more susceptible to L. monocytogenes infection as greater levels of the pathogen would survive passage through the stomach and reach the intestine to potentially establish infection. Our study also demonstrated that using both selective and nonselective solid agar is necessary for L. monocytogenes recovery since sublethally injured cells were only recovered on nonselective agar  under lethal acid stress e.g. pH ..  
Overall similar survival patterns were found across all L. monocytogenes strains during the h simulated dynamic gastric exposure to milk and simulated gastric fluid  of adults with a fasting gastric pH range from . to .. All strains seemed to demonstrate the development of the adaptive acid tolerance response  when exposed to SGF with various pH values. The AATR of L. monocytogenes may provide crossprotection against other stresses that the pathogen may encounter in the human GI tract thus facilitating the establishment of infection.   
The milk fat content showed an effect on the survival of L. monocytogenes in filtered bovine fluid milk under the simulated human gastric conditions as did the gastric acidity and digestion time with the largest effect being observed close to the end of the exposure to the simulated gastric content . With a milk fat content ranging from  to . in the milk products our study demonstrated that fluid milk containing a higher milk fat content  protected L. monocytogenes from being inactivated as they are exposed to the human stomach with a gastric acidity of pH .. Compared to  and . milk L. monocytogenes survived the best in  chocolate milk which may be due to the presence of milk fat  and the additional nutrients e.g. sugar cocoa powder carrageenan which can help L. monocytogenes survive under the simulated gastric conditions and promote the growth of unstressed L. 
monocytogenes at  in this study.  
A treatment with . ppm chlorine appeared to completely inactivate the cells of L. 
monocytogenes however a small portion of cells seemed to enter the VBNC state. This study is the first to examine the resuscitation of VBNC cells of L. monocytogenes under refrigeration conditions. In fact VBNC cells appeared to be present in inoculated  milk  chocolate milk and . milk at . Overall our study provides additional information/evidence that chlorinebased disinfectants can induce L. monocytogenes to enter the VBNC state. These VBNC cells could be a public health concern as under the right conditions they can resuscitate and grow when a stress is removed as observed in our study.  
In conclusion the findings from this thesis demonstrate that L. monocytogenes is capable of activating a variety of survival defense mechanisms against acid and chlorine stresses that they may encounter inside the host or in the food processing environment. Certain ingredients from flavoured and unflavoured commercial filtered bovine milk products e.g. milk fat and sugar can play an important role in enhancing the survival and/or growth of L. monocytogenes under stressed and nonstressed conditions. Food manufacturing facilities  that use chlorinebased disinfectants may want to consider coupling the culturebased method with fast viability methods to confirm the absence of both “culturable” and VBNC cells after sanitation and pasteurization.  

