Cronobacter sakazakii can cause severe illnesses in infants with consumption of contaminated powdered infant formula  being the major vehicle of infection. This thesis examined the behaviour of C. sakazakii in an acidic environment of a newborn’s stomach and when in the viable but nonculturable  state. The SHIME was used to simulate the gastric conditions of newborns. C. sakazakii grew in the stomach portion of the SHIME during a h exposure to pH . . and . by .. .. and .. log CFU/mL respectively. The gene expression analyses showed that C. sakazakii appeared to develop an acid adaptation response during the h exposure. Altogether low gastric acidity and lengthy digestion time facilitated the adaptation and survival of C. sakazakii in the newborn’s stomach. An exposure to a thermal treatment of  for  seconds mimicking commercial spraydrying was sufficient to induce C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF into the VBNC state. C. sakazakii cells in the VBNC state showed signs of resuscitation and growth after a h incubation in reconstituted PIF at .  
 
 

 
 
 Introduction 
Cronobacter spp. are emerging opportunistic foodborne pathogens that can cause illnesses in all age groups  a; Government of Canada ). The natural habitat of Cronobacter spp. is not well understood but the pathogen has been isolated from diverse environments such as production facilities foods hospitals and homes . Powdered infant formula  has been implicated as a vehicle of infection in neonatal infections . Although PIF is pasteurized and preexisting pathogens cannot survive pasteurization PIF is not a sterile product and pathogens such as C. sakazakii can enter PIF production through i) the addition of heatsensitive nutrients after pasteurization ii) crosscontamination with production equipment and iii) handling and filling of PIF cans . Cronobacter spp. can survive but not grow in PIF for years and may pose risks when PIF is rehydrated especially if it is temperatureabused  and World Health Organization  ). Due to the ubiquity of Cronobacter spp. PIF contamination can also take place in the household through crosscontamination from dirty utensils . 
Certain Cronobacter spp. have been reported as being pathogenic for infants with C. 
sakazakii having the greatest clinical significance . Infections of newborns with C. sakazakii are rare but have a casefatality rate of  . The dose response of C. sakazakii for humans has not been established due to the lack of followup of sporadic cases and outbreaks  as well as the lack of a good animal model. In addition the mechanism by which C. sakazakii survives in the stomach of newborns is unclear. The acidity of the stomach is the host’s first line of defense against ingested foodborne pathogens ; however if a pathogen can survive gastric acidity it can potentially colonize the intestines and cause infections . The physiology of a newborn’s stomach such as gastric acidity and length of stomach transit time is different than that of adults and this may affect the fate of pathogens entering the newborn’s gastrointestinal  tract . Studying the survival of C. sakazakii or other pathogens within food matrices in the human GI tract presents its own challenges: i) in vivo experiments are unethical and impractical and ii) some in vitro models may not accurately mimic the physiological conditions of the human GI tract. However a dynamic in vitro simulator of the human GI tract called the Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem  is capable of mimicking the physiological conditions of a newborn’s GI tract . Therefore the use of SHIME in this study allowed for a more accurate representation of the survival of C. sakazakii as it travels through the stomach of newborns. 
Foodborne pathogens encounter environmental stresses in food production facilities such as drying of milk in the manufacturing of PIF. Exposure to stresses may cause bacteria to enter a starvation mode and induce the formation of viable but nonculturable  cells . PIF may contain VBNC C. sakazakii cells that have been induced by drying or added with the raw ingredients. VBNC cells present in PIF cannot be detected by routine culturedependent methods and may result in a falsenegative result i.e. C. sakazakii cells are present but cannot be detected because they are in the VBNC state . Under favourable conditions VBNC cells can be resuscitated and may pose risks if ingested . It is unknown whether VBNC C. sakazakii cells can be resuscitated through the rehydration of PIF.  
In addition to the absence of C. sakazakii and other foodborne pathogens in PIF the safety of reconstituted PIF is also affected by its preparation method. A global consensus on the recommended preparation of PIF is lacking. FAO and WHO  reported that boiling water cooled down to  and then added to PIF is effective in eliminating Cronobacter spp. and other foodborne pathogens from reconstituted PIF; this conclusion has also been reached by Health Canada  and CDC . However it is unclear at present how many countries are actually using these recommendations especially since they are not to our knowledge being included on the labels of PIF cans. 
. Research hypotheses 
We hypothesize that:  
The gastric acidity and stomach transit time of newborns can influence the survival of C. sakazakii and the expression of stress response and virulence genes.  
C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF can be induced into the VBNC state by the thermal treatment used in the manufacturing of PIF and can be resuscitated through the rehydration of PIF. 
The water temperature used to reconstitute PIF can affect the presence of live and VBNC cells of C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF.  
. Research objectives 
To evaluate the survival of C. sakazakii in the stomach of a typical newborn using a dynamic in vitro model that can mimic the physiological conditions of a newborn’s stomach. 
To evaluate the expression of stress and virulence genes of C. sakazakii as it travels through the simulated newborn’s stomach and is exposed to different gastric acidities. 
To assess whether thermal treatment used in the production of PIF can induce C. sakazakii to enter into the VBNC state in artificiallyinoculated PIF.  
To assess whether VBNC cells of C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF can be resuscitated through rehydration with water at  and .   
To investigate the effect of water temperature on the presence of live and VBNC cells of C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF.  
 	 
 Literature Review 
. Cronobacter sakazakii 
.. Taxonomy identification and sources 
Cronobacter spp. members of the Enterobacteriaceae family are Gramnegative rodshaped nonsporulating and facultative anaerobes. Cronobacter was proposed as a new genus in  to include organisms that were formerly described as Enterobacter sakazakii. Through reclassification using molecular characterization methods such as multilocus sequence typing  analysis the genus Cronobacter is now comprised of seven species: C. sakazakii C. malonaticus C. muytjensii C. turicensis C. dublinensis C. universalis and C. condimenti . Cronobacter spp. are ubiquitous in nature and can be found in soil plants human feces and skin  but the microorganisms cannot be found in animals such as domestic animals and cattle . The pathogen has been isolated from various food sources mainly dried foods such as milk powder powdered infant formula  infant weaning foods chocolate cereals potato flour dried herbs spices and pasta . The microorganism has also been isolated from the home environment  hospital environment and PIF manufacturing facilities . Among the Cronobacter spp. C. sakazakii C. malonaticus and C. turicensis have been frequently isolated from PIF and PIF manufacturing facilities with C. sakazakii being the most dominant . 
Cronobacter spp. can be grouped based on their clinical relevance: i) Group  : C. sakazakii and C. malonaticus and ii) Group  : C. turicensis and C. universalis . Although C. turicensis is classified as a member of Group  the microorganism has been isolated from infants suggesting that it may be clinically relevant . The remaining Cronobacter spp. are unlikely to cause human infections . Among the seven species C. sakazakii appears to have the greatest clinical significance due to its frequent isolation . However C. malonaticus was recently found to cause infection in infants by invading and damaging the gut epithelial cells .  
C. sakazakii can be divided into sequence types and serogroups. MLST has been used for the molecular characterization of Cronobacter spp. which divides the genus into sequence types . There are at least  STs of C. sakazakii that have been isolated from PIF and its manufacturing facilities  and the complete details of the STs are recorded in an openaccess MLST database . Among the STs C. sakazakii strains belonging to sequence type   and  are often isolated from PIF and clinical patients . Most serious cases of Cronobacter neonatal infections over the last  years have been caused by strains belonging to C. sakazakii ST. In fact out of  strains that were typed by Forsythe and colleagues  through the Cronobacter MLST scheme C. sakazakii ST was found to be the only one associated with neonatal meningitis .  
The serogrouping of C. sakazakii is determined by the variations in the Oantigens of the lipopolysaccharides. There are five serogroups of C. sakazakii: O O O O and O . Table  summarizes the sources each serogroup has been isolated from. Serogroups O and O are reported to be the most prevalent due to their frequent isolation . Serogroup O in particular has been reported to be nonexclusively associated with neonatal meningitis pathovar C. sakazakii ST .  

.. Clinical manifestations of C. sakazakii in adults and infants 
The epidemiology of Cronobacter/C. sakazakii is incomplete and poorly described because of its rare occurrence in comparison to other foodborne pathogens such as Salmonella Escherichia coli and Listeria monocytogenes and cases are often underreported due to missing or different reporting criteria in developed and some developing countries . Cases of C. sakazakii infection are sporadic and mostly associated with infants . Although the pathogen is universally known as an infant pathogen C. sakazakii has been shown to pose potential risks to adults especially elderly and immunocompromised adults . Morbidity and mortality as a result of C. sakazakii infection are largely dependent on the immune status of the host.  
... Adults 
The symptoms of infections in adults are mild however the presence of serious health conditions may affect fatality . Between  Cronobacter  was isolated from  hospitalized elderly however the pathogen was not determined as the cause of death but rather the patients died from the severity of their underlying health conditions . Overall Cronobacter infections in adults are understood to be nosocomial and nongastrointestinal with the infections in healthy adults being rare . However in an outbreak in  C. sakazakii was isolated from leftover cafeteria food that resulted in acute gastroenteritis in  healthy adults . Some of the C. sakazakii isolates were of ST which has a high clinical relevance . This outbreak was the first to link C. sakazakii to foodborne illness in healthy adults showing that we may be underestimating the numbers of foodborne illnesses caused by this pathogen.  
... Infants 
Infants who are i) immunocompromised ii) of lowbirthweight  iii) born prematurely and/or iv) under months old especially newborns  are the most atrisk groups for Cronobacter infections . Cases in infants have been mostly associated with the consumption of contaminated PIF as PIF is not a sterile product. Among the neonatal cases reported from  to   had recent PIF consumption . Cronobacter spp. may contaminate PIF during manufacturing preparation of reconstituted PIF or improper storage conditions. Cases have also been associated with the consumption of poorly handled expressed breast milk i.e. collection of breast milk through pumping. Table  summarizes Cronobacter/C. sakazakii infections in newborns from  to . The majority of the infections were caused by consumption of contaminated PIF or expressed breast milk.  
Ingestion of Cronobacter spp. in infants may result in meningitis bacteremia and necrotizing enterocolitis . With a casefatality rate of  to  affected infants have been reported to die within one week of diagnosis. Those who recover may develop longterm side effects such as neurological sequelae and developmental disorders . The Food and Agriculture Organization  and World Health Organization  reported that meningitis is the most prominent clinical manifestation of C. sakazakii infection which likely develops during the day newborn period due to immunologic and neurovascular immaturity in this age. In contrast bacteremia tends to affect infants outside the day period . Mortality and morbidity of infants with bacteremia are lower than those with meningitis as the latter can develop complications such as seizures and brain abscesses . C. sakazakii has also been isolated from cases of necrotizing enterocolitis  which is the most common gastrointestinal infection in premature infants and lowbirthweight newborns . However due to the multifactorial nature of the disease i.e. the number of pathogens associated and their similarities in NECinducing mechanisms no specific microorganism has yet to be pinpointed as the causative agent . The impact lethality and vulnerable population affected by C. sakazakii are the main reasons for the increased interests in studying the pathogen in recent years.  
 
 

 
 
.. Pathogenesis and virulence factors of C. sakazakii 
... Pathogenesis 
Infants are especially vulnerable to infections of C. sakazakii and other foodborne pathogens due to their underdeveloped immune system and immature intestinal epithelial barrier. 
As a foodborne pathogen C. sakazakii enters the host’s digestive tract through the mouth then travels to the intestines where it can cause systemic infection. In newborns Pagotto and Farber 
 proposed that the pathogen can survive the transit in the stomach due to the low acidity  of the stomach. The pH value of the stomach of newborns ranges from  to  with a median of pH  which is less acidic than that of infants older than  days  and of adults . Furthermore the stomach transit time i.e. the time it takes for the stomach to be empty after feeding in newborns  is twice as long as the stomach transit time in adults . C. sakazakii can survive in environments of pH values ranging from . to  which shows that the low gastric acidity of newborns coupled with a lengthy transit time create a favourable growth environment for the pathogen . Forsythe  also proposed that C. sakazakii strains that have adapted to environmental stresses encountered in PIF manufacturing facilities may be more resilient in surviving the transit in the human gastrointestinal  tract. Additionally milk has a high buffering capacity which can protect the bacterial cells from acid and bile salts as they travel through the stomach and small intestine . The likelihood of infection will ultimately depend on the number of bacterial cells ingested and the immune system of the newborns and/or infants.  
Currently the pathogenesis and infection pathway of C. sakazakii are not fully understood however there are three postulated sequences of events in the pathogenesis: A) adhesion and invasion of the intestinal epithelial cells through fibronectin and outer membrane proteins  interaction B) translocation to the bloodstream through the lack of tight junctions and C) the crossing of the bloodbrain barrier . The adherence of C. sakazakii to the intestinal epithelial cells is achieved by binding to fibronectin on the host intestinal epithelial cells through the interaction of OmpA of C. sakazakii with fibronectin . Fibronectin is a glycoprotein host receptor that can be found on the surfaces of epithelial cells and is one of the primary targets in the adhesion of several pathogens . In an in vitro model of embryonic intestinal cells a reduction in fibronectin levels was shown to impair the attachment of C. sakazakii to INT cells . It has been shown that C. sakazakii can adhere strongly to host tissue due to its binding to fibronectin . 
 Following adherence C. sakazakii colonizes and invades the host tissue. Colonization of the intestine by C. sakazakii has been observed in patients with NEC a disease where the intestinal tissue of the small or large intestine becomes damaged or inflamed . C. sakazakii can suppress the maturation of dendritic cells by entering and propagating within the cells to evade the immune system . The interaction between OmpAexpressing C. sakazakii and dendritic cells stimulates the production of nitric oxide synthase which disrupts the intestinal barrier . Furthermore C. sakazakii can also bypass the gut epithelia of newborns by disrupting the tight junctions . In healthy individuals the junctions of the gut epithelia prevent molecules and bacteria from bypassing the epithelium and entering the bloodstream . However in newborns the tight junctions and gut microflora of newborns are not fully developed which can result in increased permeability of the intestinal epithelia . C. sakazakii and other pathogens can easily translocate from the intestinal epithelium into the bloodstream via exocytosis and cause bacteremia .  
Once in the bloodstream C. sakazakii travels to the bloodbrain barrier  and invades the human brain microvascular endothelial cells  as shown in Figure C . This causes meningitis which is the inflammation of membranes surrounding the brain and may potentially cause neurological sequelae . The OmpA and OmpX have been reported to play a role in invading HBMEC and penetrating the BBB. The lack of these proteins can result in a reduction in the invasion of HBMEC by  . Furthermore C. sakazakii can cross the BBB by expressing the gene zpx which encodes for the zinccontaining metalloprotease an enzyme responsible for the lysis of collagen of the BBB . It is important to note that not all C. sakazakii strains can cause meningitis. Thus far only C. sakazakii ST has been identified as the predominant sequence type to be found in the cerebrospinal fluid from cases of neonatal meningitis . 
 

 
 
 
 
 
... Other virulence factors 
The OmpA and OmpX are the most well characterized virulence factors of C. sakazakii. In addition to these proteins there are other virulence factors that may play an important role in the pathogenesis of C. sakazakii. However the contributions of these factors to the pathogenesis and virulence of the pathogen are not currently understood. It has been reported that the invasiveness of C. sakazakii increases with increasing numbers of putative virulence factors/genes possessed by the strains .  
.... Hfq 
The Hfq protein is a widely conserved regulatory protein that is involved in the pathogenesis communication and survival of several foodborne pathogens including E. coli Salmonella Typhimurium and L. monocytogenes . In comparison to these enteropathogens the studies on the roles of Hfq in C. sakazakii virulence are limited.  Hfq is as an RNA chaperone that regulates the expression of other virulence genes. Kim et al.  reported that the absence of the hfq gene in C. sakazakii attenuated the ability to invade human epithelial cells significantly reduced the survival in macrophages by  and impaired the ability to cope with environmental stresses such as acid and oxidative stresses. In fact the expression of hfq in wildtype C. sakazakii was increased during desiccation and under acid stress conditions . In E. coli Hfq was reported to regulate the expression of OmpA and OmpX however Kim et al.  observed the opposite in C. sakazakii suggesting that Hfq may not regulate the expression of both outer membrane proteins in C. sakazakii. However more research needs to be conducted to confirm the hypothesis. Another unique function of Hfq to C. sakazakii is in the regulation of the expression of flagellumassociated genes . The deletion of hfq gene in mutated C. sakazakii resulted in hypermotility which is a unique observation to C. sakazakii and has not been observed in Salmonella and uropathogenic E. coli . It has been reported that the overexpression of flagella and hence increased motility can reduce the ability of C. sakazakii to invade epithelial cells .  
.... Enterotoxin and sod gene 
Pagotto et al.  suggested the possibility that an enterotoxinlike compound may enhance the virulence and translocation of C. sakazakii across the gut epithelia and BBB. The characteristics of the enterotoxinlike compound are as follows:  kDa in size most stable at pH value of  heat stable i.e. can withstand a high temperature of  for  mins and gave potent activity . The toxin may function similarly to the lipopolysaccharides that is by mediating the activation of the Tolllike receptor  and stimulating the host inflammatory response . Jaradat et al.  reported that this toxin remains functional during the manufacturing and shelf life of PIF. To date no gene has been assigned to this protein . 
C. sakazakii can also evade the host’s immune system by invading and replicating within macrophages . It is believed that some pathogenic strains possess the ability to produce an enzyme called superoxide dismutase encoded by the sod gene which breaks down the reactive oxygen species  produced by macrophages . The function of ROS is to inactivate the pathogen but when the ROS can no longer degrade C. 
sakazakii the pathogen can survive and replicate within the macrophage .   
 
.... Utilization of sialic acid 
Sialic acid is a bioactive compound found in breast milk and PIF and is needed for brain development . In newborns an increase in sialic acid residues can be found on the intestinal microvilli as the oligosaccharides cannot be metabolized due to the immature gut microbiota . The residual sialic acid has been reported to cause proliferation of the gut microbiota and weaken the integrity of the intestinal epithelial lining . Whole genome sequencing revealed that C. sakazakii is the only Cronobacter species that possesses the gene cluster nanAKT that encodes for sialic acid utilization . However further research is needed to validate the linkage between sialic acid metabolism and pathogenicity of the pathogen.  
.... Capsule 
Bacterial capsules are high molecular weight polysaccharides that protect the cell from environmental stresses and play a role in virulence by enabling the microorganism to evade host immune response . The capsules of Cronobacter spp. have been reported to provide protection against desiccation which may contribute to the longterm persistence in PIF . The structure of capsules can vary between strains and has been reported to affect their virulence . Through a capsular typing scheme Ogrodzki and Forsythe  revealed that clinical strains of C. sakazakii and C. malonaticus isolated from severe cases of neonatal meningitis and NEC had different capsular structures than strains with less severe clinical cases thus demonstrating a potential linkage between capsular structures and degree of pathogenicity. However further research is needed to investigate the mechanistic role of C. sakazakii capsules.  
. Stress response of C. sakazakii  
Microorganisms face adverse hurdles in their surroundings that affect their survival. Consequently bacteria have developed stress response mechanisms that not only sense the stresses but also trigger the appropriate response for survival in a harsh environment . Environmental stresses could come from outside the host  and/or inside the host . These stresses are known to induce adaptive responses within the bacterial cell for example by improving the resistance to stress in the current physiological state or transitioning to a dormant state .  In some cases bacteria can enhance their resistance to lethal stresses after an exposure to a sublethal stress through genetic regulation or physiological adaption a phenomenon known as crossprotection . The bacterial stress coping strategies can be general and/or specific to the stress. By definition a general stress response is triggered by multiple different stresses with less specific responses that often lead to broad crossresistance i.e. resistance to stresses not encountered in the original induction . In contrast a specific stress response responds to a specific environmental signal e.g. low pH by repressing or activating the appropriate genes and encoding proteins to avoid alleviate and/or repair cellular damage . When compared to other Gramnegative bacteria and/or foodborne pathogens studies on stress response strategies in C. sakazakii are limited. This section will discuss the stress response mechanisms of C. sakazakii in three areas: i) general stress response ii) acid stress response and iii) the dormancy state. Table . lists the genes that contribute to the general stress response and acid adaptation responses of C. sakazakii.  
.. General stress response of C. sakazakii 
Similar to other Enterobacteriaceae members such as E. coli RpoS is responsible for the general stress response mechanism in C. sakazakii. RpoS is a sigma factor of RNA polymerase and a master regulator that modulates the expression of  of the genome in Gramnegative bacteria . In RpoSmediated stress response bacterial cells can sense stress by recognizing the signal receptors in response to the external environment. Sigma factor S  then regulates the transcription function of RNA polymerase by binding to the promoter or nearby region to achieve the transduction of signal to activate the appropriate genes .  
In C. sakazakii RpoS has proved to be significantly important in bacterial survival under acid osmotic pressure and oxidation stresses . An upregulation in the expression of rpoS was observed in C. sakazakii strain Yrta during a min exposure to pH . . Zhan et al.  found that the absence of rpoS in mutated C. sakazakii strain BAA significantly reduced its growth in a h exposure to pH values of . and . when compared to the growth of the wildtype strain. However no difference in growth was observed when the wildtype and ?rpoS strains were exposed to pH values of . and . indicating that at these pH values the bacterial cells were not experiencing acid stress . It has also been reported that the upregulation of rpoS may affect the transition of C. sakazakii to enter the viable but nonculturable  state after a h period of desiccation . 
It is important to note that there may be significant heterogeneity among C. sakazakii isolates in their ability to tolerate stresses which can be associated with the variation in rpoS activity among the isolates . A study by AlvarezOrdóñez et al.  indirectly examined the RpoS activity by determining the catalase activities and nutritional profiles of  clinical C. sakazakii isolates. They found a possible linkage between variation in rpoS activity and their tolerance to environmental stresses i.e. isolates exhibiting low rpoS activity were seen to be more susceptible to stresses. Interestingly rpoS is a highly mutable gene in E. coli as the gene is located in a highly polymorphic region of the chromosome  however further research is required to confirm if this is the case for C. 
sakazakii. 
.. Acid stress response of C. sakazakii 
Acid stress can be described as the combined or individual biological effect of low pH and weak  acids present in the environment . Weak acids in their uncharged forms can diffuse freely across the cell membrane and dissociate once inside the cell . When the extracellular pH is lower than the intracellular pH weak acids dissociate and release proton inside the bacterial cells lowering the intracellular pH . This acidification can cause protein denaturation and lipid hydrolysis which can disrupt the cell membrane and genetic material eventually leading to cell death . In the host the acid condition in the stomach is the first line of defense against enteropathogens. There are limited studies on the acid adaptation response of C. sakazakii and the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. The genes that contribute to the acid stress response of C. sakazakii are listed in Table B. 
C. sakazakii has been shown to exhibit tolerance to acid stress at pH value ? . . Ling et al.  reported that the glutaredoxin gene  contributes to the survival and biofilm formation of C. sakazakii strains under acidic growth conditions of pH values of . . . and .. Furthermore Ling et al.  also observed a reduction in bacterial growth in a grxBdeleted C. sakazakii mutant in comparison to the growth of the wildtype strains. The h exposure to the lowest treatment pH value of . was lethal to the ?grxB mutant however the wildtype strain was able to survive but not grow. At a slightly less acidic pH  the growth of ?grxB mutant was . log CFU/mL less than the wildtype strain indicating the important role that grxB plays in the acid adaptation of C. sakazakii .  
SdiA a quorumsensing receptor in C. sakazakii E. coli and Salmonella was found to contribute to the survival of C. sakazakii CICC  in simulated gastric fluid that was acidified with hydrochloric acid  to a pH value of . . The loss of sdiA gene in the mutant strain was associated with a  reduction in the survival rate in the acidic environment when compared to the survival rate of the wildtype strain . NlpD a lipoprotein located in the bacterial outer membrane was also found to play a role in the acid tolerance of C. sakazakii in a h exposure to pH value of . . The nlpDdeleted mutant strain displayed increased sensitivity to acid and membrane permeability when compared to the wildtype strain suggesting that NlpD contributes to the acid tolerance of C. sakazakii by maintaining membrane integrity . 
Through a transcriptomic analysis using RNAseq Zhou et al.  revealed several other genes that are responsible for the acid tolerance and/or resistance of C. sakazakii. The genes 
that were upregulated in HClinduced acid stress are listed in  	 Table B. The proposed mechanisms for an HClinduced acid stress by Zhou et al.  are as follows: 
Increased intracellular proton concentration is reduced via several metabolic pathways such as arginine deiminase  pathway butanediol pathway glycine cleavage system decarboxylation and/or reduction. Among these pathways it is speculated that C. sakazakii prefers the AD pathway to increase intracellular pH because this pathway not only consumes protons but also produces energy. The AD converts arginine into ammonia carbon dioxide ornithine and ATP while consuming protons and increasing the intracellular pH to enhance acid stress resistance and/or tolerance.   
Pumping out excess protons through the upregulation of cfa gene. This gene encodes the cyclopropane fatty acyl phospholipid synthase which is a major component of the membrane phospholipids. The enzyme synthesizes cyclopropane fatty acids  to decrease the permeability of the cytoplasmic membrane to protons.   
 	 
.. C. sakazakii in the viable but nonculturable state 
Microorganisms can become injured when they are subjected to stresses and as a response they may enter into a unique physiological state known as the VBNC state. The VBNC state is a dormant state for viable nonsporulating microorganisms which have lost their ability to grow on standard culture media . Typically these cells exhibit low metabolic activities and can be resuscitated under specific favourable conditions e.g. when the stress causing the formation of VBNC cells is removed . 
Many pathogens in the Enterobacteriaceae family can enter this state including E. coli O:H Salmonella Shigella and Enterobacter cloacae and many others . The ability of C. sakazakii to enter the VBNC state was first reported in   but there is little known about the induction and resuscitation mechanisms of VBNC C. sakazakii cells. Thus far C. sakazakii is known to be induced into the VBNC state through desiccation and lengthy exposure to an acidic pH . The resuscitation method that has been reported to successfully resuscitated VBNC C. sakazakii to its culturable state is by incubating the VBNC cells in an enriched growth medium such as tryptic soy broth with sodium pyruvate catalase Tween  or autoinducers at  for  to  h .  
The existence of Cronobacter/C. sakazakii in the VBNC state is seen as a possible explanation for why the microorganism can go undetected in a PIF sample when it is contaminated with Cronobacter. However more studies are needed to be able to establish the frequency of occurrence and environmental triggers that can cause C. sakazakii to go from viable and culturable to the VBNC state. There is no evidence that the PIF manufacturing facilities and commercial quality control labs have developed and/or use the methods for the detection of VBNC cells as a part of their general microbiological procedures.  
. Cronobacter spp. and powdered infant formula 
.. Microbial safety of PIF and reconstituted PIF 
Infant formula such as PIF and liquid infant formula is a substitute for human milk under the circumstances where breastfeeding is not sufficient possible or desirable. Newborns are particularly vulnerable to infections due to the lack of a fully developed immune system therefore the microbiological quality of infant formula plays a vital role in reducing the risks of neonatal infections. Readytofeed liquid infant formula is a sterile human milk substitute that is recommended for feeding premature lowbirthweight and immunocompromised newborns . In cases where liquid infant formula cannot be accessed due to lack of availability or high cost PIF can be used as an alternative only if prepared safely according to the manufacturer recommendations as PIF is not a sterile product . In the U.S. the Food and Drug Administration  has long discouraged the use of PIF in neonatal intensive care units ever since the Cronobacter  outbreak in  in the U.S that infected  atrisk newborns . 
The concerns with microbial contamination of PIF are due to the fact that any pathogens that survive or contaminate PIF may be able to rapidly multiply once the milk powder is rehydrated as milk is an excellent media for bacterial growth .  In assessing the microbial safety of PIF FAO and WHO  identified  microorganisms that are primarily associated with PIF contamination . These microorganisms are grouped into three categories  based on the degree of causality between their prevalence in PIF and illness in infants. Cronobacter spp. along with Salmonella enterica are classified as a category “A” organism to indicate clear evidence of causality in PIF contamination . Cronobacter and Salmonella can enter PIF in four possible routes: i) contamination through ingredients that are not heattreated such as heatsensitive vitamins; ii) contamination acquired from the processing environment; iii) contamination after the package is opened and iv) contamination during or after reconstitution due to improper hygiene and/or prolonged storage .  
... Microbial contamination at the manufacturing level 
PIF can be produced in two different ways: wetblending or dryblending as shown in Figure . In the dryblending process all the PIF ingredients are heattreated by the suppliers and in powdered form which are then mixed and packed in cans . Since there is no heat treatment in place to inactivate bacteria that may be present  the microbiological quality of PIF produced through dryblending process is largely determined by the quality of the ingredients . An unpublished study by FAO and WHO  on PIF ingredients revealed that Enterobacteriaceae are most likely to be found in starch and the least likely in oil. The microbial quality of dryblended PIF can be improved by selecting suppliers of ingredients that adhere to stringent control measures such as Good Manufacturing/Hygiene Practice  and conducting microbial testing of the ingredients to ensure safety .   
In contrast PIF manufactured using the wetblending method may have a better microbiological quality due to the integration of pasteurization into the process . Pasteurization is performed by heating the liquid ingredients at  for  seconds to inactivate pathogens including Salmonella and Cronobacter . However microbial contamination can still take place in the remaining stages of manufacturing as there is no further sterilization step in place due to the addition of heatsensitive ingredients postpasteurization . Postpasteurization contamination could occur from biofilms on the surfaces of equipment poor microbiological quality of heatsensitive ingredients and unhygienic practices during packaging . Recommended strategies to reduce the incidence of microbial contamination at the manufacturing level include implementation and strengthening of control measures such as GMP or GHP and the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point  systems . Controlling Cronobacter and other pathogens in the first stages of PIF manufacturing is the most important step to reducing the incidence of contamination in the final product.    
... Microbial contamination at the caregiver level 
Due to the ubiquity of Cronobacter and the other microorganisms of concern identified by 
FAO and WHO  these pathogens can also be found at home or in hospitals. For example 
Cronobacter has been isolated from the hospital environment  and home sinks . 
Microbial contamination can also occur after the PIF container is opened by a caregiver and at any stage between reconstitution storage and feeding. The contamination of PIF at the caregiver level is often associated with improper hygienic practices when reconstituting PIF e.g. the use of contaminated water utensils work surfaces and dirty feeding bottles . In fact Cronobacter has been isolated from dirty pacifiers and its biofilm was also found on the internal surfaces of feeding bottles and pacifiers . Cho et al.  found that C. sakazakii and other pathogens associated with infantile illnesses can be transmitted from skin  to PIF via spoons which are stored inside the PIF cans and the pathogens can survive up to  weeks in PIF depending on the bacterial load on the skin. 
Furthermore improper storage condition of reconstituted PIF can also contribute to the growth of Cronobacter and/or other pathogens. As previously mentioned reconstituted PIF is highly nutritious and can support bacterial growth when given the favourable conditions of water availability time and temperature. Once reconstituted the remaining barriers to increase bacterial growth are time and temperature. The recommended storage for reconstituted PIF is at refrigeration temperatures  for  h prior to consumption or to consume within  hours after feeding starts . Improper storage conditions involve prolonged storage at room temperature or high refrigeration temperatures . According to Forsythe  it takes approximately  h for Cronobacter to double at  and only  minutes at room temperature. FAO and WHO  reported that the risk of ingesting Cronobacter would increase by  and fold after  and  h of storage of reconstituted PIF respectively at  therefore indicating the importance of immediate consumption and using proper storage temperatures for reconstituted PIF. 
Recommended strategies to prevent microbial contamination of opened and reconstituted PIF are to i) practice proper hygiene when preparing reconstituted PIF including washing hands cleaning the preparation area and using clean and possibly sterilized utensils feeding bottles and pacifiers; ii) using boiled water that has been cooled to at least  to rehydrate PIF and iii) strictly adhering to the storage conditions indicated on the PIF containers . Boiling water and cooling it down to   to reconstitute PIF would eliminate Cronobacter and other pathogens that may be present in PIF . However this inactivation strategy does not apply equally to all PIF e.g. PIF that contains probiotics as the high temperature may kill the beneficial bacteria.  

.. Prevalence of Cronobacter spp. in PIF   
PIF has been linked to cases of Cronobacter infections in infants since   as the pathogen is more frequently found in dry processing areas of PIF manufacturing facilities than Salmonella . Cronobacter can persist in PIF over a long period of time 
e.g. for up to  years due to the ability to resist drying or osmotic stress . An international survey examining the incidence of Cronobacter in PIF in seven countries found a level of contamination ranging from . to . cfu per  g . Recalls due to contamination of PIF with Cronobacter have occurred in various countries including Canada .  
In PIF manufacturing facilities Cronobacter has been isolated from i) the environment outside of the facilities; ii) surfaces of processing equipment; iii) heatsensitive ingredients added postpasteurization and iv) in the final products . Several studies have reported a higher occurrence of Cronobacter contamination in outside areas of the facilities and on surfaces of equipment than in heatsensitive ingredients however this could be due to the limited number of studies examining the latter. Proudy et al.  highlighted that the environment is a major source of Cronobacter contamination in PIF manufacturing facilities. The microorganism can be brought into the processing areas of the facilities through air movement and/or busy foot traffic . In fact Cronobacter has been found in supply air poorly maintained and installed air filters  air conditioners  and areas with busy foot traffic . In processing areas Cronobacter has been isolated from internal and external surfaces of processing equipment such as spray dryers blenders fluidized beds and packaging equipment potentially through poor cleaning of infant formula residues on these surfaces . Cronobacter may attach grow and/or form biofilms on the internal surfaces of PIF storage tanks or fluidized beds thus becoming a source of contamination when the processing equipment is reused . An indepth study of Cronobacter contamination in four PIF manufacturing facilities in China revealed that most of the isolates were C. sakazakii  followed by C. malonaticus  and C. turicensis  as determined by pulsedfield gel electrophoresis and MLST analyses .  
FAO and WHO  has recommended that each lot of PIF should be sampled according to an approved sampling plan outlined in the “Code of Hygienic Practice for Powdered Infant 
Formulae for Infants and Young Children” by the Codex Alimentarius Commission . The microbiological criteria for PIF as issued by the Codex requires the absence of 
Cronobacter in  g of the final products in  samples . These criteria have been adopted by Canada  the U.S.  and the European Union . For detecting Cronobacter quality control labs are recommended to use the most recent version of ISO validated methods for either culturebased or rapid detection methods . However some countries may adopt other validated detection methods and/or have additional testing requirements. For example in the U.S. labs need to follow the FDABAM  standard which states that a culturebased detection method is sufficient if polymerase chain reaction  technology is unavailable however labs are encouraged to perform both tests . In Canada the approved detection methods are using the BAX System as described in the MFLP  and culturedependent methods as outlined in the ISO  . 
. Human gastrointestinal models 
.. Overview of human GI simulators 
The human gut is a complex and dynamic environment that plays a role in the digestion of nutrients protection against pathogens and enhancement of the immune system. Simulated human GI models were first developed in the s as a less invasive alternative to human clinical trials to allow researchers to further study the human gut microbiome and the implications of foods or diets on human health . Studies using in vitro human GI models are also reproducible and controlled therefore they reduce the interindividual variations that are often associated with clinical trials . Although in vitro models are built to closely model the in vivo digestion process there are some limitations to the use of in vitro models as some aspects of digestion such as the breaking down of solid foods cannot be replicated yet in any of the available human GI models . There are two types of human GI models: noncontinuous and continuous .  
Noncontinuous  digestion models are the simplest in vitro models that can mimic any region of the GI tract in which the contents of the simulated compartment are typically immobile and confined in a single bioreactor . If the experimental design requires replication of multiple human GI compartments static models can also consist of multiple bioreactors that are not interconnected. In this case the content from one bioreactor to the subsequent bioreactor must be manually transferred by the researcher . Although static models can be used to replicate any region of the GI tract these models are better suited for mimicking the oral gastric or small intestinal phase than the colon due to the complex digestion process in the colon i.e. the presence of colonic microbiota . Static batch culture or singlebatch fermenter is a type of static models that replicates the colon region. Fecal slurries along with the rest of the simulated contents are added into the single bioreactor to replicate the colonic microbiota . However due to the accumulation of bacterial metabolites  and depletion of nutrients in the bioreactors over time experiments in static models are shortterm and typically focused on evaluating the effects of food components or bacterial strains on the simulated compartment of the human GI tract . 
Continuous multicompartment digestion models also known as dynamic models are human GI simulators that consist of sequentially attached bioreactors and a computercontrolled fluid transfer system  which makes these models more closely resemble the in vivo conditions of the human GI tract when compared to the static models. Continuous digestion models were first introduced in s with the aim to better model the microbial ecology throughout the different regions  of the colon .  The continuous flow within the system helps distribute the nutrients and metabolites to allow the colonic microbiota to propagate. In addition to controlling the influx and efflux of GI content parameters in each bioreactor e.g. pH and retention times can be controlled to mimic the changes in vivo over time . 
 Two of the most wellknown continuous GI simulators are the TNO intestinal model and the Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem  that both replicate the upper and lower regions of the human GI tract. The TNO intestinal model  was developed by Minekus et al.  and is comprised of two complementary systems TIM and TIM. The TIM mimics the stomach and three regions of the small intestine  while the TIM replicates the proximal colon . The TIM model features glass compartments that are connected with peristaltic pumps for fluid transfer and surrounded by waterfilled glass jackets to establish the in vivo body temperature . The TIM has been used to study the effects of a wide variety of food on the human GI tract . In food safety TIM has been used to study the behaviour of foodborne pathogens in simulated GI conditions of various age groups such as E. coli in in vitro GI conditions of adults and children . 
Detailed information regarding the SHIME system can be found in section ...   
.. The Simulator of the Human Intestinal and Microbial Ecosystem  
The SHIME is one of the latest in the generation of multicompartment gut simulators that can mimic the entire human GI tract. The first generation of SHIME was introduced in  by 
Molly et al.  from the awareness that the fecal microbiota differs between parts of the colon . There are two types of SHIME systems: the conventional or luminal  SHIME and the mucosal  SHIME. Both systems have been validated with in vivo parameters and have been used in industrial and scientific projects .  
The SHIME is a computercontrolled machine comprised of multiple bioreactors or vessels that simulate the upper  and lower  regions of the human GI tract. The entire SHIME system operates at the human body temperature  and under anaerobic conditions. The peristaltic pumps connecting each vessel allow a defined amount of simulated content  to be transferred between vessels at a certain speed and intervals. Although the SHIME is primarily used to simulate the colon microbial community it can also simulate the gradual acidification process that occurs in the human stomach. The system has a modular setup i.e. any vessels can be added or removed from the setup to allow for simulation of all or any parts of the human GI tract from the stomach to colon. Furthermore the SHIME software allows for certain parameters to be customized such as the volume of uptake pH of each vessel speed of peristaltic pumps and intervals of fluid transfer . An example of a SHIME setup can be seen in Figure . 
In the field of food safety the SHIME has been used to simulate the potential responses of the human GI system upon ingestion of contaminants or beneficial compounds . In this thesis the SHIME system was used to simulate the physiological conditions of the stomach of newborns to examine the behaviour of C. sakazakii as it travels through the stomach.  
 

.. Studies on C. sakazakii using in vitro GI models 
To the best of our knowledge there is a limited number of research examining the behavior of C. sakazakii or other Cronobacter species using in vitro GI models. For example Ke  evaluated the effects of synbiotics i.e. probiotics and prebiotics on the survival of C. sakazakii in newborn GI models using the SHIME. Other studies focused on the survival and/or acid stress management of C. sakazakii in the stomach were conducted using tubes and/or beakers similar to a static model where the gastric contents  were added into a single container and bacterial growth was observed at a fixed pH value . Furthermore dynamic multicompartment in vitro GI models mimicking the upper digestive system of adults and children have been used to study the survival of other Enterobacteriaceae such as E. coli  and Salmonella  using the TIM and SHIME systems respectively. 
 	 

 Materials and Methods 
. Bacterial strains 
A total of five strains of C. sakazakii were used in this study  and the identity of all strains was confirmed by S rRNA sequencing. All strains were cultivated at  on Brain Heart Infusion agar  and Blood Agar . C. sakazakii isolates were streaked onto R&F Enterobacter sakazakii  selective agar  to check for purity. To prepare bacterial stock cultures a lawn of a single colony was resuspended in freezing media composed of   skim milk    glycerol    dimethyl sulfoxide  and kept frozen in cryogenic vials at .  
	 
. Serogrouping of C. sakazakii strains 
Five C. sakazakii strains were streaked from frozen stock onto BHI agar to obtain single colonies. A single colony of each strain was suspended in  mL of BHI broth and incubated at  for  h. The cells were then harvested by centrifugation at  x g for  min and the resulting cell pellets were resuspended in  µL Buffer ATL from the DNeasy Blood and Tissue 
Kit  following the pretreatment protocol for Gramnegative bacteria . DNA extraction was conducted according to the manufacturer’s instructions to purify total DNA from animal tissues. DNA was eluted twice for maximum yield and stored at .  
A mixture of seven primer sets  obtained from Sun et al.  was used to identify the serogroup of five C. sakazakii strains using multiplex PCR 
. Each MPCR reaction of  µL contained X ThermoPol buffer  Pickering ON) . mM of magnesium sulfate  . mM of deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates  . µM of primer mix .U Taq DNA Polymerase  nucleasefree water and  µL of DNA template. The MPCR was conducted in a Biometra TProfessional Basic Thermocycler  using the following program: an initial denaturation at  for  min;  cycles of / seconds / seconds with decreasing temperature in increments of . and ramp of °/seconds / min;  cycles of / seconds / seconds / min; and a final extension at 
 for  min. The sizes of PCR products were determined by gel electrophoresis using .  agarose with EXVision Three loading dye   and visualized with the ChemiDoc Imaging System . 
 	 
 
. Evaluation of bacteria isolated from powdered infant formula 
.. Preparation of reconstituted powdered infant formula 
The powdered infant formula  used in this study was intended for  months old babies  of which two different lots were purchased from retail sources in Guelph ON. PIF was reconstituted aseptically in sterile water at  at :  milk powder to water ratio following manufacturer’s instructions and stirred until homogenous.  
.. Isolation and identification of bacteria found in PIF by S rRNA 
A total of  µL of reconstituted PIF  was spreadplated onto BA and incubated at  for  h under two separate conditions: aerobic and anaerobic. Colonies were counted to determine total viable cells at  and  h. Following the h incubation plates were further incubated at  for  h to assess the growth of new putative phenotypes. Bacterial isolates were collected in triplicates for each observable phenotype per lot of food. Individual isolates were then subcultured onto BA for purity checks and stored in freezing media at . For the anaerobic incubation the plates were incubated at  for  h in an anaerobic jar equipped with a gas pack .  
Bacterial isolates were identified by S rRNA sequencing. A single colony of each isolate was suspended in  µL of TE buffer  and boiled at  in a water bath for  min. The samples were then centrifuged at  x g for  min to pellet down the bacterial cells. The supernatant containing the DNA template was transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube stored at  for further use. 
PCR amplification of the S rRNA gene was carried out in  µL reactions containing 
X ThermoPol buffer . mM of dNTPs . µM of each primer . U of Taq DNA Polymerase nucleasefree water and  µL of DNA template. A primer set composed of VKL and VR  was used to amplify the V to V regions of the S rRNA gene . The PCR was conducted in a Biometra TProfessional Basic Thermocycler using the following program: an initial denaturation at  for  min  cycles of / seconds / seconds / seconds and a final extension at  for  min. The size of the PCR amplicon was determined by gel electrophoresis using .  agarose with EXVision Three loading dye and visualized by the ChemiDoc Imaging System. 
The PCR amplicons were sent for sequencing to the University of Guelph Advanced Analysis Centre Genomics Facility . Sequences were trimmed using CodonCode Aligner and compared to existing sequences on NCBI GenBank database using BLASTn. Identity of isolates was determined based on over  identity match to the sequences of similar isolates on the database.  
.. Growth inhibition assay against C. sakazakii 
A growth inhibition assay was conducted following the method of Gelda et al.  to assess whether bacteria isolated from PIF can inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii strains. PIF bacterial isolates and five strains of C. sakazakii were incubated in  mL of tryptic soy broth  at  for  h. Enterobacter tabaci strain E isolated from wild maize and donated by Dr. Manish Razaida  was used as a positive control and grown in the same manner. The negative control in this assay was . peptone water.  
Following incubation a lawn of each C. sakazakii strain  was swabbed onto tryptic soy agar  using a sterile cotton swab leaving the bottom portion of the plate blank and allowed to dry for  min. A total of  µL of each PIF bacterial isolate E. tabaci and . peptone water were pipetted onto the lawn of C. sakazakii as shown in Figure . The liquid droplets were left to dry for  min and incubated at  for  h. If present a clear zone around the isolate was quantitatively measured  and would indicate an inhibition of C. sakazakii by the PIF bacterial isolate. This assay was repeated in triplicate.  

 
. Acid tolerance assessment of C. sakazakii 
Five strains of C. sakazakii were exposed to different levels of acidity for  h. LuriaBertani broth and agar  were prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Prior to sterilization LB broth was divided into four glass bottles of equal volume. One bottle was not acidified to serve as a control ; three bottles were acidified to pH values . . and . ± . with . M hydrochloric acid  and . M sodium hydroxide .  
A single colony of C. sakazakii was inoculated into  mL of nonacidified LB broth and incubated at  shaking at  rpm for  h. Following incubation acidified LB broths were inoculated with the overnight culture to reach an OD value of .. and incubated at  for  h with sampling at    and  h. Samples were diluted in a tenfold serial dilution plated onto LB agar in triplicates and incubated at  for  h for total viable counts. This experiment was repeated twice for each strain. 
. Survival and gene expression of C. sakazakii in reconstituted PIF in a newborn gastric model of the Simulator of the Human Intestinal Microbial Ecosystem  
.. Setup of the SHIME to simulate the stomach of a newborn  
... Stomach pH profile of newborns 
There is a linear decrease in gastric acidity in newborns from feeding to the end of digestion in the stomach . The feeding pH is the pH of a mixture of reconstituted PIF and SGF in a :  ratio which represents the stomach pH after feeding at  h  whereas the fasting pH is the pH when the stomach is empty at  h. Therefore in order to mimic the newborn’s stomach the pH profile of each SHIME stomach vessel was programmed to gradually decrease in  min increments from feeding pH  to fasting pH  based on a linear regression equation on Microsoft Excel . The protocol was repeated to obtain a pH profile for each fasting stomach pH . 

 
... Preparation of newborn simulated gastric fluid and pepsin 
Newborn simulated gastric fluid  was comprised of  mmol/L sodium chloride  mmol/L potassium chloride . mmol/L calcium chloride and  mmol/L magnesium chloride . The total amount of SGF needed for the entire SHIME experiment was prepared in one batch and divided into three glass bottles of equal volume. The SGF was acidified to pH . . and . ± . with . M HCl and . M NaOH then sterilized by vacuum filtration with . µM polyethersulfone  membrane filter units  and stored at room temperature .  
Pepsin stock solution was prepared by dissolving pepsin from porcine gastric mucosa 
 in distilled water at   to reach a final concentration of  U/mL. The stock solution was sterilized by vacuum filtration with . µM polyvinylidene difluoride  membrane filter units aliquoted  into  mL centrifuge tubes and stored at .  
... Preparation of PIF 
PIF was reconstituted in glass bottles as described in section ... The bottle was then placed in a polypropylene tray filled with water to cover onethird of the milk  and sterilized at  for  min using an autoclave  h prior to the SHIME experiment. The sterilized PIF was cooled to room temperature for approximately  h and then stored at  overnight. The setup time and temperature for sterilization were based on the efficacy in eliminating the bacteria in PIF as it could interfere with C. sakazakii gene expression analysis and also without promoting milk caramelization which could alter the pH of the milk . The optimization of PIF sterilization is described in Appendix A.  

 
... Preparation of inoculum  
C. sakazakii strains  and  were subcultured from frozen stock cultures on LB agar. For each strain a seeding culture of C. sakazakii was prepared by inoculating  mL of LB broth with a single bacterial colony and followed by incubating at  for  h in a shaking incubator . Following incubation an overnight culture was prepared by inoculating LB broth with the seeding culture to reach an OD value of .. and then incubating at  shaking at  rpm for  h. 
To prepare the inoculum for inoculating the SHIME vessels an aliquot of the overnight culture of C. sakazakii was added into sterile PIF at   to make a total volume of  mL. The inoculum was left at  for  min before injecting into the SHIME vessels to replicate the storage time limit of reconstituted PIF. A sterile  mL syringe and needle  were used to transfer  mL of the inoculum into the SHIME vessel resulting in a final inoculum level of  x  CFU C.sakazakii/mL. 
... Inoculation of SHIME vessels and sampling for survival and gene expression analyses  
Four SHIME vessels with .. L volume capacity  were used and designated for the following treatments: ) negative control ) fasting stomach pH  of . ) fasting stomach pH of . and ) fasting stomach pH of . . With a total volume of  mL each treatment vessel contained  mL SGF of the treatment pH  mL of sterilized reconstituted PIF and  mL of inoculum containing C. sakazakii. The negative control vessel contained similar components however sterile reconstituted PIF was used as an inoculum  and SGF of treatment pH . was added. Pepsin stock solution was added to all vessels to obtain a final concentration of  U/mL . 
After the inoculum  was added into each vessel the SHIME program initiated the gradual decrease in pH following the pH profile calculated in section .... The system automatically adjusted the pH to the programmed value  by adding . M HCl and/or . M NaOH. The mixture in each vessel was continuously stirred at  rpm. The temperature of the system was maintained at  through a circulating water bath. The water bath was turned on  min prior to inoculation to allow for the temperature of the liquid mixture to equilibrate to . 
Sampling was conducted on treatment vessels  at timepoints    and  h. Samples  were aspirated using sterile syringes through the sampling ports and were immediately divided into the following:  mL of sample for survival analysis of C. sakazakii  and  mL of sample for C. sakazakii gene expression analysis .  


 
... Sterility  
All glass vessels lids and parts used to setup the SHIME were sterilized at  for  min in the autoclave and assembly of the vessels were conducted aseptically in a biosafety cabinet. Sampling ports were disinfected with  bleach and allowed to dry prior to sampling.  
Although the assembly of the SHIME vessels were conducted aseptically the equipment was not located in a sterile environment; therefore sterility checks of the system were carried out during the experiment to validate whether sterility was compromised.  Samples  were taken from each vessel prior to inoculation and at  h from the negative control vessel. An aliquot of  µL was then plated onto BA and incubated at  for  h.  
.. Survival of C. sakazakii strains in the simulated gastric compartment of the SHIME 
For survival analysis  mL of the samples collected from each treatment stomach vessel  at each timepoint  were serially diluted tenfold in . peptone water. An aliquot of  µL was plated onto R&F Cronobacter agar and incubated at  for  h for enumeration. Bacterial colonies were reported as log CFU/mL and adjusted relative to the counts at  h.   
.. Gene expression of C. sakazakii strains collected during SHIME experiment 
... RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis 
To prevent RNA degradation  mL of the SHIME samples collected from each treatment stomach vessel  at each timepoint  were immediately added into tubes containing stop solution  acid phenol to sample ratio) homogenized and incubated at  for  h. Bacterial cells were pelleted at  x g for  min in a Beckman floor centrifuge  and the resulting supernatant was discarded. The pellets were flash frozen at  for  min and then stored at . 
Frozen pellets were partially thawed at  for  min and homogenized in  mL of TRIzol . Due to the high fat content of PIF samples were centrifuged at  x g for  min to discard any fat that could interfere with extraction of RNA. The supernatants were transferred into screwcap tubes and incubated at  for  min to allow for complete dissociation of nucleoproteins complex.  
Chloroform was added to the tubes containing supernatants in a ratio of . mL of chloroform per  mL of TRIzol incubated at  for  min and then shaken vigorously. Tubes were centrifuged at  x g for  min to separate the mixture into three phases: a lower red phenolchloroform an interphase and a colorless upper aqueous phase which might contain RNA. The upper aqueous phase was carefully aspirated and transferred to a screwcap tube and the chloroform wash was repeated to ensure that there was no residual phenol left that could affect the quality of RNA. After the second chloroform wash the aqueous phase was mixed with   ethanol  to provide appropriate binding conditions for the subsequent step . Further extraction was carried out oncolumn using the RNeasy Mini Kit and DNase I oncolumn treatment  with the following modifications: the membrane was washed twice with  µL Buffer RPE then centrifuged at  x g for  min and RNA was eluted twice with  and  µL of RNasefree water. Quantification of RNA was performed using the Nanodrop. The quality of RNA was analyzed by the University of Guelph Advanced Analysis Centre Genomics Facility  using the TapeStation  System . 
Prior to conversion to cDNA PCR reactions were performed on RNA samples using S rRNA primers  to detect the possible contamination with genomic DNA. Rigorous DNase treatment using TURBO DNAfreeTM Kit  was carried out on samples containing genomic DNA. All PCR products were run on gel electrophoresis using .  agarose with EXVision Three loading dye and visualized by the ChemiDoc Imaging System. cDNA was synthesized using SuperScriptTM VILOTM cDNA Synthesis Kit  with no modifications and stored at . 
... qRTPCR  
The C. sakazakii RNA extracted from different SHIME samples were evaluated for the gene expression of the following genes:  housekeeping genes   stress response genes  and  virulence genes . Gene expression analyses of the C. sakazakii target genes were conducted on samples collected from the SHIME at timepoints   and  h from pH treatments of . . and .. With a final volume of  µL each qPCR reaction contained final reagent concentrations of X Power Up SYBR Green   nM of forward and reverse primers and  µL of cDNA template.  The reactions were carried out in CFX TouchTM RealTime PCR Detection System in hardshell well skirted PCR plates  using the following conditions: a UDG activation at  for  min; DualLockTM DNA polymerase activation at  for  min;  cycles of denaturation at  for  seconds annealing at  for  seconds and extension at  for  min; followed by a melt curve from  to  . The expression of stress and virulence genes was quantified using the normalized relative quantification  method  on CFX MaestroTM software  in which the expression of the gene of interest  was normalized to that of the housekeeping genes and compared to the expression of the GOI at  h.  
 	 

. Induction of C. sakazakii VBNC cells in artificiallyinoculated PIF 
.. Inoculation of PIF 
To artificially inoculate PIF C. sakazakii strains   and  were individually grown in BHI broth at  shaking at  rpm for  h and diluted in . peptone water to reach  CFU/mL . The culture  was centrifuged at  x g for  min at  and the supernatant was discarded. The bacterial pellet was washed twice in an equal volume of . peptone water. The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellet was weighed in 
 mL centrifuge tube.  
The amount of PIF to be inoculated was calculated in a :  cell pellet:PIF ratio . Half of the amount of PIF was added into the  mL centrifuge tube containing the cell pellet; the rest of the PIF was added in a later step . The PIF and cell pellet were mixed using a sterile metal spatula to obtain a water activity value close to . . At this stage the inoculated PIF was wet in appearance. The inoculated PIF was then transferred into a small sterile Petri dish  to be desiccated .  
.. Desiccation of artificiallyinoculated PIF 
The artificiallyinoculated PIF was dried in an airtight container with desiccant  placed under a rack . The Petri dishes containing artificiallyinoculated PIF were placed on top of the rack with the lids left ajar and desiccated at room temperature for  h to reach a water activity level close to . which was the water activity of the noninoculated PIF.  
The dried clumps of artificiallyinoculated PIF along with the remainder of the noninoculated PIF from section .. were transferred into a sterile mortar and pestle and ground until they turned into powder.  The powder was mixed thoroughly with a sterile metal spoon to ensure homogeneity. The water activity of the final dried artificiallyinoculated PIF was measured and expected to be close to a value of ..  
To determine the concentration of C. sakazakii in the final dried artificiallyinoculated PIF . g of the inoculated PIF was suspended in . mL of sterile distilled water  which followed the manufacturer’s suggested powdertowater ratio for rehydration of PIF. Tenfold serial dilutions were performed in . peptone water and spread plated  onto BHI agar plates which were incubated at  for  h.  

 
.. Thermal treatment of artificiallyinoculated PIF to induce VBNC cells 
To induce VBNC cells of C. sakazakii in PIF a total of . g of dried inoculated PIF from section .. was transferred into . mL tubes. Two tubes of the same strain were prepared and exposed to temperatures of  and  for   and  seconds using a heat block. The tubes were then cooled at  for  seconds to stop the impact of heat treatment . The heated artificiallyinoculated PIF was reconstituted in sterile distilled water  at :  water to PIF ratio and vortexed for  seconds. The water at  was prepared by placing a halffilled sterile glass bottle in a water bath at  for  h and an aliquot of the warmed water was aseptically taken to check the temperature. The presence of C. sakazakii was assessed by plating the reconstituted artificiallyinoculated PIF  on BHI agar. Bacterial cells were presumed to have entered VBNC state when there were no colonies observed on the neat plate after  h incubation at .  
. Recovery of VBNC and nonVBNC C. sakazakii cells in artificiallyinoculated PIF 
Recovery of VBNC C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF was assessed at three different conditions to simulate the storage time limit of reconstituted PIF the transit time in a newborn’s stomach and the average complete digestion time in newborns . The reconstituted PIF from section .. was first held at room temperature  for  h and an aliquot of  µL was spreadplated onto BHI agar. The remaining reconstituted PIF was then incubated at  shaking at  rpm for  h. Samples were taken at  and  h and the appropriate fold serial dilutions were plated  onto BHI agar. All agar plates were incubated at  for  h for enumeration.  
To assess the recovery of nonVBNC C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF . g of inoculated PIF that had not been exposed to heat treatment  was rehydrated in sterile distilled water of  and  at :  water to PIF ratio and agitated for  s. Samples were taken at  h plated  onto BHI agar and incubated at  for  h. The rehydrated suspension was exposed to the same conditions and sampled at the same timepoints as previously described.    
. Data analysis 
All experiments were repeated twice with two independently cultured C. sakazakii strains on two different days. Experiments with PIF were conducted with two lots of milk powder to take into account the variation within the food matrix. For culturedependent quantification samples were plated onto agar media in triplicate. For gene expression analysis qRTPCR was conducted in triplicates on samples collected from both biological replicates of the SHIME experiment. Data was pooled  only if no significant difference was observed between biological replicates and if applicable food lots.  
Statistical analyses were carried out on SAS University Edition  using Proc Glimmix command. ShapiroWilks normality homogeneity and residuals tests were conducted to confirm that all assumptions were met. The twoway ANOVA test was followed by the Tukey’s posthoc test  to determine significant differences at the  confidence level  . A ttest was conducted if there were only two groups to be compared. Values were tabulated as means ± standard deviation and graphed on Microsoft Excel with error bars indicating the standard deviation.  
 
 	 

 Results 
. Serogrouping of C. sakazakii strains 
The serogroups of five C. sakazakii strains used in this study were determined through a multiplex PCR . Since there were no positive controls for the serogroups the sizes of the MPCR amplicons were compared to the amplicons in a study by Sun et al.  which provided the primer sequences for the MPCR. Each of the five C. sakazakii strains produced a single amplified product when the MPCR products were separated on an agarose gel . The sizes of the amplicons matched the expected sizes of MPCR products from Sun et al.  and based on the corresponding serogroups the serogroups of the C. sakazakii strains used in our study 
are O  O  and O  . The negative controls i.e. nucleasefree water and nontarget DNA using L. 
monocytogenes DNA did not show amplification . 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 	 


. Evaluation of bacteria isolated from powdered infant formula 
.. Identification of bacterial isolates in powdered infant formula 
To recover bacterial isolates from powdered infant formula  reconstituted PIF was plated onto blood agar and incubated at  aerobically and anaerobically. The phenotypes of bacterial colonies were distinguished based on their morphology i.e. size color margin and elevation . A total of  presumptive bacterial isolates were recovered from PIF with an aerobic plate count of  log CFU/g. Among these isolates  phenotypes were distinguished:  from lot  and  from lot .  No bacterial isolates were recovered anaerobically with the conditions established in this study. 
The PIF bacterial isolates were identified by S rRNA sequencing which involved primers targeting the V to V regions of the S rRNA gene. The sequencing provides genuslevel and with lower confidence specieslevel bacterial identification. The bacterial isolates recovered from PIF belong to four genera with over  identity match: Anoxybacillus  Bacillus  Virgibacillus  and Brevibacterium . Due to phylogenetic relatedness of some species PIF bacterial isolates were described with multiple specieslevel identities separated by a slash  symbol . 
.. Growth inhibition assay against C. sakazakii strains 
The bacterial isolates recovered from PIF  were evaluated for their potential 
inhibitory activity against five C. sakazakii strains  by plating them on a lawn of C. sakazakii. To ensure that all PIF bacterial isolates could grow on TSA and to avoid falsenegative results the isolates were checked for growth in the absence of C. sakazakii . A bacterial isolate was considered to have a potential inhibitory activity against C. sakazakii when it satisfied the following conditions: ) grew in the presence of the pathogen and ) produced a clear growth inhibition zone. The positive control Enterobacter tabaci produced . ± . mm inhibition zones against all five C. sakazakii strains. However only  of the PIF bacterial isolates grew when plated on the lawns of C. sakazakii strains and none produced inhibition zones against C. sakazakii . The results suggest that the bacterial isolates recovered from the PIF used in this study do not possess inhibitory properties against C. sakazakii. 
. Acid tolerance assessment of C. sakazakii  
The objective of this experiment was to screen for acidtolerant and sensitive strains to be tested in the Simulator of the Human Intestinal and Microbial Ecosystem . Acid tolerance of five C. sakazakii strains was assessed by inoculating  log CFU/mL of C. sakazakii into LB broth that was acidified to pH values of . . or .. The survival of each strain was monitored at  and  h and the levels of C. sakazakii at each pH treatment were enumerated . At pH . and . all C. sakazakii strains grew by . to . and . to 
. log CFU/mL in  h respectively with significant growth being observed at pH . . At pH . the levels of all C. sakazakii strains declined by a range of . to . log CFU/mL over  h.  
ANOVA was conducted to determine the effect of the h exposure at pH treatment of . on the survival of C. sakazakii Among the five strains strain  showed the least reduction in population after the h exposure  and was determined as the acidtolerant strain. Strains  and  showed the highest population declines of . and . log 
CFU/mL  respectively and they were determined as the acidsensitive strains. Due to its clinical origin strain  was selected as the acidsensitive strain for the SHIME experiments to be compared with the acidtolerant strain .  
 
 
 
. Evaluation of survival and gene expression of C. sakazakii in a simulated newborn stomach in the Simulator of the Human Intestinal and Microbial Ecosystem  
C. sakazakii strains   and   were inoculated into the stomach vessels of the SHIME at an initial level of  log CFU/mL and the growth of each strain was monitored at    and  h. Throughout the SHIME experiments sterility of the system was assessed by sampling the negative control vessel which contained sterilized PIF simulated gastric fluid  acidified to treatment pH . and pepsin prior to inoculation and at the end of the  h experiment. No colonies were observed on the blood agar which indicated that the SHIME remained sterile throughout the entire experiment.  
Prior to inoculation the SGF was acidified to the treatment or fasting pH of . . and . and mixed with sterilized reconstituted PIF and pepsin stock solution. The pH of this mixture which is referred to as the feeding pH was measured to be . . and . for treatment pH values of . . and . respectively. The addition of C. sakazakii inoculum into the mixture did not significantly alter the pH reading as measured by the SHIME . To mimic the pH profile of a newborn’s stomach the pH of each stomach vessel was gradually decreased by the SHIME software in min increments for  h from the feeding pH values until it reached the fasting pH values of . . and .. The pH readings of each stomach vessel at sampling timepoints of    and  h can be seen in Figure .  
 	 


.. Survival of C. sakazakii in the simulated newborn stomachs of SHIME at fasting stomach pH values of . . and . 
The survival of the acidsensitive  and acidtolerant  C. sakazakii was assessed by plating onto R&F Cronobacter selective agar. The recovery of C. sakazakii on nonselective LB agar and selective R&F agar was assessed in a smallscale trial prior to the SHIME experiment and no significant difference in counts was observed .   
There was no significant difference between biological replicates and food lots therefore the survival data from the SHIME experiment were pooled for analyses . The results are presented in two ways: ) Figure  shows the effects of pH treatments on the growth of individual C. sakazakii strains over the course of  h and ) Figure  compares the survival of acidsensitive versus tolerant C. sakazakii strains at each pH treatment. 
The exposure to different acidities affected the growth of each strain differently. The acidsensitive strain grew the slowest in the first  h followed by log of growth then the populations either plateaued or continued to increase depending on the end pH . Among the pH treatments the strain grew the least in the h exposure to treatment pH of .  with a total growth of . log CFU/mL in comparison to . and . log CFU/mL at pH . and . respectively. At pH . and . the levels of the acidsensitive strain were similar at  and  h with growth of approximately . and . log CFU/mL at  and  h respectively . The growth pattern of the acidtolerant strain was the opposite of that of the sensitive strain. The acidtolerant strain grew the fastest in the first  h by approximately  log; this was followed by a plateau as the pH reached their respective fasting pH values of . . and . . In the h exposure to pH values of . . and . the acidtolerant strain grew by . . and . log CFU/mL respectively. Although the strain grew the least at pH . the population at  h was not significantly different than that at pH . and . . The levels of the acidtolerant strain at pH . and . at   and  h were not significantly different .  
Across all pH treatments the acidsensitive strain showed significantly less growth than the acidtolerant strain in the first  h . As the pH continued to decrease to reach the fasting pH of . . and . the acidsensitive strain grew significantly and surpassed the growth of the acidtolerant strain at  and  h . The difference in levels between the two C. sakazakii strains at  h was the most significant at the treatment pH value of 
.  with the population of the acidsensitive strain being . log CFU/mL lower than the tolerant strain .  As the pH reached . at  h the level of the acidsensitive strain was similar to that of the tolerant strain . At pH . and . the acid sensitive strain grew less than the tolerant strain by . and . log CFU/mL  respectively . The growth of both strains was favored at the treatment pH of . with a total increase in population of . and . log CFU/mL in  h for the acidsensitive and tolerant strains respectively .

 
.. Gene expression in C. sakazakii during exposure to a simulation of the stomach of a newborn using the SHIME at pH treatments of . . and . 
... Detection of rpoB hfq rpoS grxB and ompA genes in C. sakazakii 
Detection of the housekeeping  regulator  stress  and virulence  genes in C. sakazakii was conducted using PCR to ensure that the genes were present in the acidsensitive strain  and acidtolerant strain  and that the primers specifically amplified the target genes. The presence of a single amplicon for each gene was observed on an agarose gel which suggested that all the genes were present in both C. sakazakii strains and the primers were specific to the target genes . The sizes of PCR products for rpoS  and hfq  matched the amplicon sizes from the study by Jameelah et al.  which used the same primer sequences. For the primers that were designed on this study  the predicted amplicon sizes for rpoB grxB and ompA were  bp  bp and  bp respectively. 
The negative control  did not show amplification. 
 	 

... Assessment of RNA quality 
The quality of RNA was assessed prior to conversion to cDNA through the following measures: ) checked for the presence of genomic DNA by PCR and ) checked for RINe number by TapeStation  System performed by the Genomics Facility at the University of Guelph. The PCR using S rRNA primers was performed on all RNA samples to ensure that there was no contamination with genomic DNA. An amplified product at  bp on the agarose gel indicated the presence of contamination with genomic DNA in the RNA . After the contaminated samples were treated with DNase another round of S rRNA PCR was performed and no amplification was observed on the agarose gel .  
The TapeStation analyses assessed the integrity and quality of the RNA samples and assigned an RNA integrity number equivalent  to each sample on a point scale where a low RINe indicates strongly degraded RNA and a high number indicates highly intact RNA . The RNA samples in this study had RINe values ranging from  to  indicating the presence of good quality RNA and thus meeting the recommended RINe value for qRTPCR . Lastly using the NanoDrop the absorbance ratios A/ and A/ of each RNA sample were checked for purity as residual chemical contamination e.g. Trizol could be carried over from the extraction procedure. The RNA samples had A/ and A/ ratios of .. where RNA samples with A/ value of ~. and A/ value of .. are considered pure .  
 	 


... Gene expression quantitation using the comparative Ct method  
The expression of regulator stress and virulence genes of C. sazakakii at  and  h of simulated gastric digestion was calculated following the normalized relative quantification method  by Livak and Schmittgen  in which the expression of the gene of interest  was normalized to that of the housekeeping gene rpoB and compared to the expression of the GOI at  h . The gene expression is reported in foldchange where a value greater than  indicates an upregulation and a value less than  indicates a downregulation of the GOI. 
This cutoff value was determined based on the foldchange of the GOI at  h . 
For every downregulated GOI a negative inverse of ??Ct  was calculated to determine the fold reduction in the gene expression relative to  h . 
The results are presented in two ways: ) Table  shows the comparison of each gene between acidsensitive and tolerant C. sakazakii strains and ) Table  and Table  compare the expression of each gene in individual strains between pH treatments  at  and  h. 
... Expression of the regulator gene hfq  
.... Comparison of hfq gene expression between strains at  and  h at treatment pH of . . and . 
The regulator gene hfq was upregulated in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains at  and  h of gastric digestion in treatment pH . . At  h of treatment pH .  the expression of hfq was . times higher in the acidsensitive strain than in the tolerant strain .  When the in vitro stomach pH had decreased to . at the end of the h gastric digestion hfq was expressed . and . times higher than at  h in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains respectively .  
After  h of exposure in treatment pH .  hfq was upregulated by .foldchange in the acidsensitive strain but the gene was downregulated in the acidtolerant strain by .fold . The expression of hfq at  h when the pH had decreased to . was the opposite of  h. In the acidsensitive strain the gene expression significantly declined by .fold 
 from  to  h. However the expression of hfq in the acidtolerant strain increased by fold  from  to  h. 
At the treatment pH of . hfq was upregulated at  h  by . and 
.foldchange in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains respectively . As the pH reached . at  h hfq was still upregulated in the acidsensitive strain with a . times significantly higher expression level than at  h . In contrast the expression of hfq in the acidtolerant strain declined by .fold from  to  h . 
.... Comparison of hfq gene expression in each strain between pH treatments at  and  h  
A twoway ANOVA was conducted to explore the effects of pH treatments on hfq gene expression and whether the effect was dependent on the duration of exposure to the acidic environment. The comparison of gene expression between pH treatments at  and  h in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains are shown in Tables  and  respectively. In the acid sensitive strain the expression of hfq at  h was similar between pH . and .  but the gene expression in pH . at  h was approximately .fold lower than the other pH treatments . At  h when the pH values of the in vitro stomach reached their respective fasting pH of . . and . the expression of hfq was significantly different between all pH treatments . The gene was upregulated at treatment pH values of . and . by . and .foldchange respectively  but hfq was downregulated by .fold in pH 
.. In comparison to  h the expression of hfq increased from  to  h in pH . and . by . and .fold respectively . Interestingly the gene expression decreased from  to  h in pH . by .fold .  
In the acidtolerant strain hfq was upregulated at a similar level at  h of treatment pH of 
. and . with an upregulation of . and .fold respectively .   In contrast the gene was downregulated by .fold at  h of treatment pH ..  The expression of hfq increased from  to  h in treatment pH . and . by approximately . and .fold respectively .  Interestingly the gene expression in treatment pH . decreased by .fold from  to  h  and the gene became downregulated at  h.

... Expression of stress genes rpoS and grxB  
.... Comparison of rpoS and grxB gene expression between strains at  and  h at treatment pH of . . and . 
The stress genes rpoS and grxB were upregulated in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains throughout in vitro gastric digestion in treatment pH .. At  h of gastric digestion in treatment pH .  the expression of rpoS and grxB was . and . times higher respectively in the acidtolerant strain than in the sensitive one . The expression of rpoS significantly increased from  to  h in both strains . When comparing the foldchange values at  h  which was calculated relative to  h the expression of rpoS was significantly higher in the acidtolerant strain than the sensitive one . However the increase in expression from  to  h was significantly higher in the acidsensitive strain than the tolerant strain  with .foldincrease in the acidtolerant strain compared to .foldincrease in the acidsensitive strain. Similarly the change in expression of grxB from  to  h in treatment pH . was also significantly higher in the acidsensitive strain than the tolerant strain . While grxB expression increased by .fold in the acidsensitive strain from  to  h  the gene expression in the acidtolerant strain declined by .fold .  
After  h of exposure to treatment pH .  rpoS was downregulated by .fold in the acidsensitive strain and upregulated by .fold in the acidtolerant strain . At the end of the h gastric digestion  the expression of rpoS increased by . and .fold from  h in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains respectively . The expression of grxB in treatment pH of . was different than rpoS. At  h grxB was upregulated in both strains and it was expressed . times higher in the acidtolerant strain than the sensitive strain . The grxB expression significantly increased by .fold from  to  h in the acidsensitive strain  however the expression in the acidtolerant strain at  h was approximately fold lower than at  h .  
The rpoS gene was downregulated by .fold in the acidsensitive strain and upregulated by .fold in the tolerant strain after  h of gastric digestion in pH . . The expression of rpoS significantly changed in both strains when the pH reached . at the end of the h digestion. The gene was upregulated in both strains with . and .foldchange in acidsensitive and tolerant strains respectively relative to  h . However when comparing the gene expression at  versus  h the level of rpoS expression increased by .fold in the acidsensitive strain  but declined by .fold in the acidtolerant strain . At  h of treatment pH of . grxB was upregulated in both strains however the gene was expressed approximately  times higher in the acidtolerant strain than in the sensitive strain . At the end of gastric digestion  the expression of grxB increased by .fold from  to  h in the acidsensitive strain . In the acidtolerant strain grxB was still upregulated at  h however the expression declined by approximately fold in comparison to  h . 
.... Comparison of rpoS and grxB gene expression in each strain between pH treatments at  and  h 
When the expression of rpoS and grxB in each strain was compared among all pH treatments a twoway ANOVA analysis showed that the pH and duration of exposure to the acidic environment significantly impacted the gene expression . In the acid sensitive strain rpoS was upregulated at  h of treatment pH of . at .foldchange but the gene was downregulated by . and .fold at  h of treatment pH . and . . 
The rpoS gene expression significantly increased from  to  h by . . and .fold at treatment pH of . . and . respectively . At  h rpoS was upregulated at all pH treatments and the gene expression at pH . was observed to be . and . times higher than the expression at pH . and . . 
 The expression of grxB in the acidsensitive strain at  h was significantly different between pH treatments  with an upregulation of . . and .fold at treatment pH of . . and . respectively . At the end of the h gastric digestion the gene expression significantly increased from  to  h at all pH treatments . Among the pH treatments the increase in grxB expression from  to  h was observed to be the highest at pH 
. showing an increase of .fold . The gene was highly expressed at  h of pH . at .foldchange which was . and . times higher than the expression at pH . and . .  
In the acidtolerant strain rpoS was upregulated at  h of all pH treatments. However the gene was poorly upregulated at  h of treatment pH of . at .foldchange compared to pH . and . . At  h rpoS was upregulated by . . and .fold at treatment pH . . and . respectively . The expression of rpoS significantly increased from  to  h by . and .foldchange at treatment pH of . and . . Interestingly at treatment pH . the expression of rpoS declined by .fold from  to  h .  The grxB gene was upregulated in the acidtolerant strain at  and  h of gastric digestion at all pH treatments. The gene expression at  h was similar between pH treatments ranging from a value of . to .foldchange . The grxB expression declined by 
. . and .fold from  to  h at treatment pH . . and . respectively . 
Comparing between pH treatments the expression of grxB at  h was similar between pH . and 
.  however the gene expression at  h of pH . was about  to fold lower than the other treatments .    
... Expression of the virulence gene ompA  
.... Comparison of ompA gene expression between strains at  and  h at treatment pH of . . and . 
The outer membrane protein A gene  was upregulated in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains at  and  h of gastric digestion in treatment pH .. At  h of treatment pH .  ompA was upregulated by . and .foldchange in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains respectively . The expression increased from  to  h in the acidsensitive strain by .fold  however the expression in the acidtolerant strain did not significantly change from  to  h . 
After  h of gastric digestion in treatment pH .  ompA was upregulated in the acidsensitive strain as evidenced by a .foldchange; however in the acidtolerant strain ompA was downregulated . times as compared to  h . At the end of digestion  the expression of ompA significantly increased by . and .fold in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains respectively . The expression of ompA was 
. times higher in the acidtolerant strain than the sensitive strain . 
The ompA gene was upregulated at  h of treatment pH of .  in both strains however the gene was expressed significantly higher in the acidtolerant strain than in the sensitive strain by approximately fold . At the end of the h digestion  the expression of ompA increased by .fold from  to  h in the acidsensitive strain . In contrast the expression of ompA significantly declined by approximately fold from  to  h in the acidtolerant strain .  
.... Comparison of ompA gene expression in each strain between pH treatments at  and  h 
A twoway ANOVA was conducted to explore the effects of pH treatments on ompA gene expression and whether the effect is dependent on the duration of exposure to the acidic environment. The analyses revealed that the ompA gene expression in each strain was affected by pH treatments and the length of exposure to the acidic environment . The comparison of ompA expression between pH treatments at  and  h in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains are shown in Tables  and  respectively. In the acid sensitive strain ompA was upregulated similarly between  h of treatment pH . and .  and the expression at  h of treatment pH . was approximately fold higher than the other treatments . At  h ompA was expressed at a similar level ranging from a . to .foldchange at all pH treatments . The increase in expression of ompA from  to  h at treatment pH . was minimal by about .fold in comparison to the increase in gene expression at treatment pH .  and . .   
In the acidtolerant strain ompA was expressed at significantly different levels at  and  h of all pH treatments . The gene was upregulated at  h of treatment pH of . and . by . and .fold respectively however ompA was downregulated at treatment pH . by .fold . At  h the gene was upregulated at treatment pH of 
. and . by . and .fold but downregulated at treatment pH . by .fold . The expression of ompA decreased from  to  h at treatment pH of . and . by . and .fold . In contrast the expression of ompA in treatment pH . increased by 
.fold from  to  h .  
 
. Induction and resuscitation of viable but nonculturable  cells of 
C. sakazakii in PIF 
.. The effect of thermal treatment on culturability of C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF 
C. sakazakii strains   and  used in this experiment were clinical food and 
environmental isolates respectively . The inoculation of PIF with C. sakazakii was achieved through a dry inoculation technique where a pellet of a bacterial culture  was added into PIF at a ratio of :  to achieve a target concentration of . log CFU/g C. sakazakii in the PIF. The bacterial pellet was first mixed with  of the amount of PIF needed to create a seeding PIF inoculum then followed by desiccation of the said inoculum to reestablish the PIF preinoculum water activity . The aw of the seeding PIF inoculum was . ± . after inoculation then decreased to . ± . after desiccation at  for  h.  After the remainder of the PIF was mixed in with the seeding inoculum the aw of the final artificiallyinoculated PIF was . 
± .. To confirm the uniformity of the inoculum distribution the final artificiallyinoculated PIF was randomly sampled three times and the levels of C. sakazakii were . ± . . ± . and . ± . log CFU/g for strains   and  respectively . 
To induce the formation of VBNC cells in the artificiallyinoculated PIF six time/temperature combinations were tested:  and  for   and  seconds. The thermal treatments for  and  seconds at both temperatures and  seconds at  reduced the number of culturable C. sakazakii cells by  to  . However no culturable colonies were observed on BHI agar after the artificiallyinoculated PIF was heated at  for  seconds  therefore the artificiallyinoculated PIF from this treatment was subsequently used to evaluate the ability of the VBNC C. sakazakii to resuscitate in reconstituted PIF.  

 
 
.. Resuscitation of VBNC C. sakazakii cells through reconstitution of artificiallyinoculated PIF in  and  water 
The artificiallyinoculated PIF treated at  for  seconds was reconstituted in   and  sterile water to evaluate the ability of the potential VBNC cells to resuscitate in reconstituted PIF at three conditions simulating the ) storage time limit of reconstituted PIF recommended by the manufacture  ) stomach transit time in a typical newborn  and ) average complete digestion time in newborns . The effect of water temperature on the recovery of the VBNC C. sakazakii was also assessed. 
The resuscitation of heatinduced VBNC cells was straindependent and affected by the water temperature used to reconstitute the PIF and the duration of storage as indicated by ANOVA analysis . After  h of storage at room temperature no colonies were observed on the BHI agar from  and  reconstituted PIF . However culturable C. sakazakii cells were observed in both reconstituted PIF after  and  h of incubation at . Among the three strains used in this study strain  recovered the best after  h incubation with an increase of . and . log CFU/mL culturable C. sakazakii cells in  and  reconstituted PIF respectively. Furthermore the resuscitation of strain  was not affected by water temperature . For strains  and  the numbers of culturable cells at  h were . and . log CFU/mL lower in the  than in the  reconstituted PIF respectively .  
From  to  h the levels of C. sakazakii increased in both temperatures of the reconstituted PIF by a range of . to . log CFU/mL . The increase in culturable C. sakazakii was significantly higher in the  than in the  reconstituted PIF by . and . log 
CFU/mL for strains  and  respectively . However the increase in culturable 
 
 
cells from  to  h of strain  was not significantly different between the  and  reconstituted PIF . 

 
. The effect of water temperature on nonVBNC C. sakazakii cells in reconstituted artificiallyinoculated PIF  
The nonheattreated artificiallyinoculated PIF was reconstituted in  and  water and subjected to the same storage conditions as the heattreated PIF in section ... Rehydrating the PIF after desiccation with  water significantly reduced the populations of C. sakazakii by . and . log CFU/mL for strains  and   respectively. However the water temperature did not exhibit a significant effect on strain  . In contrast the effect of water temperature on populations of C. sakazakii over time was found to be strain dependent . There was no significant change in the levels of C. sakazakii observed after  h storage at . After  h of incubation at  all strains grew by approximately  log CFU/mL regardless of the water temperature used to reconstitute the PIF. 
After  h of incubation at  the levels of C. sakazakii increased by . . and . log CFU/mL in PIF reconstituted at  and . . and . log CFU/mL in PIF reconstituted at  for strains   and  respectively. 

 
 Discussion 
C. sakazakii is an emerging foodborne pathogen that has been associated with rare but severe cases of neonatal infections and consumption of contaminated powdered infant formula 
 has been implicated as a vehicle of infection. More studies on C. sakazakii and the Cronobacter genus are necessary to improve the understanding of their pathogenicity in newborns and infants as well as highlighting the importance for a global consensus on safe preparation of 
PIF and the development of novel food processing technologies to reduce the incidence of Cronobacter/C. sakazakii contamination in PIF. 
 The survival and gene expression of C. sakazakii in acidic pH mimicking the stomach pH of newborns have been previously studied in static in vitro models at a fixed pH i.e. the pH throughout acid exposure remained consistent and most studies were conducted in the absence of a food matrix. Many of these studies evaluated the acid response of C. sakazakii in i) an acidified growth medium with or without simulated gastric fluid  ii) acidified reconstituted PIF  or iii) an acidchallenge by adapting the bacteria to a sublethal pH prior to exposing them to a lethal pH . However the high buffering capacity of a food matrix e.g. in milk helps to prevent changes in pH which may affect the survival of a pathogen when it travels through the stomach . Furthermore a static in vitro model cannot simulate the gradual decrease in gastric pH during digestion. Therefore the understanding of the behaviours of C. sakazakii in the stomach of newborns can be enhanced by incorporating a food matrix and using a dynamic in vitro human gastrointestinal  model like the Simulator of the Human Intestinal and Microbial Ecosystem  to better simulate the physiological conditions of a newborn’s stomach. 
Foodborne pathogens encounter environmental stresses in food manufacturing facilities that may cause the microorganisms to enter a starvation mode and induce the formation of viable but nonculturable  cells . The presence of VBNC cells is a potential risk to public health as VBNC cells cannot be detected using the conventional plating technique. Studies have reported that VBNC cells can be resuscitated upon the removal of stress . Furthermore Ayrapetyan & Oliver  reported that VBNC cells can be resuscitated in mouse models which demonstrates that the ingestion of VBNC cells may pose a risk to the host. In PIF manufacturing facilities Lang et al.  showed that the milk drying process is a stress that can induce C. sakazakii and other foodborne pathogens into entering the VBNC state. A previous study by Hati et al.  has shown that acidinduced VBNC C. sakazakii can be resuscitated in a nutrientrich growth medium. However this resuscitation method does not best represent reallife conditions. If PIF contains VBNC C. sakazakii it would be valuable to evaluate whether the VBNC cells can be resuscitated through the rehydration of PIF with water which replicates the preparation of PIF.   
. Evaluation of bacteria isolated from powdered infant formula  
PIF is not a sterile food product since the addition of temperaturesensitive ingredients prior to packaging does not allow for a final sterilization step . The microbiological quality of PIF is largely affected by the microbial quality of the ingredients manufacturing types  and plant hygiene . Aerobic plate counts  are often used as a measure of good hygiene practices in food production facilities. Blood agar was used in this study to verify the growth of microorganisms with complex nutritional requirements and to enhance the differentiation of colonies . In Canada and the U.S. there is no acceptable limit of APC for PIF specifically however a limit of  log CFU/g has been established for “Canada ” and “US Extra 
Grade” powdered dairy products such as skim partlyskimmed and whole milk powder . In this study a total of . log CFU/g of background bacteria was isolated from two lots of PIF which is consistent with the reported APC of PIF in the literature. The APC of PIF collected from parts of North America Latin America Asia and Europe has been reported to range between ?  to  log CFU/g with  log CFU/g being the most commonly reported . 
All the culturable bacterial isolates identified by S rRNA sequencing in this study were nonpathogenic sporeforming Grampositive bacteria from the genera Anoxybacillus Bacillus Virgibacillus and Brevibacterium. The majority of the PIF isolates were identified to be Anoxybacillus flavithermus/mongoliensis/bogrovensis . Anoxybacillus spp. are biofilmforming obligate thermophiles that have been reported to grow in high numbers in milk powder manufacturing plants . Although Anoxybacillus are not pathogenic their presence in milk powder is an indicator of poor plant hygiene  and can consequently spoil the product over time through enzyme and acid production . A. flavithermus is one of the predominant thermophilic bacteria found in milk powder and milk powder manufacturing plants . 
From the Bacillus genus the specieslevel identities isolated from PIF were Bacillus fordii/sediminis/fortis and Bacillus simplex/Brevibacterium frigoritolerans  from PIF lot  and Bacillus rhizosphaerae/clausii from PIF lot . Among these isolates only B. fordii/fortis has been isolated from raw milk which suggests that its presence in PIF could have originated from the starting material and the bacteria were not eliminated in the pasteurization step . Although these Bacillus species are nonpathogenic B. simplex was reported to produce a heatstable toxin with similar characteristics to the toxin produced by B. cereus . However there is limited information on the properties of this toxin. From the Virgibacillus genus only V. halotolerans has been isolated from dairy products . The species isolated in this study 
V. proomi/pantothenticus are typically found in soil . Their presence in PIF can be speculated to originate from PIF ingredients and/or as a result of poor hygiene during the manufacture of PIF or its ingredients. 
All of the PIF bacterial isolates recovered in this study were tested for their potential inhibitory properties against C. sakazakii using an inhibition assay described by Gelda et al. . Although all the isolates grew well on Tryptic Soy Agar in the absence of C. sakazakii some of the Bacillus Virgibacillus and Anoxybacillus isolates did not grow when plated on the lawns of C. sakazakii strains suggesting that these isolates may be inhibited by high concentration  of C. sakazakii. However none of the PIF isolates produced clear zones of inhibition against C. sakazakii therefore it appears that these isolates do not produce antimicrobial compounds that can inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii strains. To the best of the author’s knowledge the bacterial isolates recovered from PIF in this study have not been reported to possess antibacterial activities against C. sakazakii or other Enterobacteriaceae. However new strains of Anoxybacillus flavithermus isolated from hotsprings water in Jordan were found to have antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus epidermidis Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus . 
Overall the bacterial isolates recovered from PIF in this study appeared to arise from the natural environment. Given the ubiquity of these isolates their presence in PIF can originate from PIF ingredients or within the PIF manufacturing facilities from poor handling and cleaning of the equipment . Since these isolates and other typical dairy microbial contaminants are spore and biofilmforming thermophiles they are able to survive the high temperatures and potentially form biofilms on surfaces to harbour bacterial spores that can slough off and contaminate the final PIF products . 
. Acid tolerance assessment of C. sakazakii  
The acid tolerance assessment was conducted as a preliminary experiment to the SHIME experiment to evaluate the survival of C. sakazakii strains when exposed to the gastric pH of newborns  for the average duration of digestion in the stomach . The acidic environment was created by adding hydrochloric acid to acidify LuriaBertani  broth to pH values of . . and .. The findings of this study showed that the ability of C. sakazakii to tolerate acidic conditions was strain and pHdependent. All five C. sakazakii strains were able to grow at  by a maximum of . and . log CFU/mL in LuriaBertani  
broths that were acidified to pH . and . respectively . Bacterial growth was significantly higher at pH . than pH . which was 
consistent with the findings of a study conducted by Zhu et al. . The pH values of . and 
. can be considered mildly acidic and are not low enough to inhibit the growth of C. sakazakii. 
Previous studies have reported that C. sakazakii can grow at a minimum pH value of .  with some strains able to grow down to a pH of . .  In the current study all C. sakazakii strains survived exposure to pH . however 
the levels of C. sakazakii declined over the course of  h at  . The reduction in culturable cells suggests that C. sakazakii experienced the most 
acid stress at pH . in comparison to pH . and ..  
The tolerance of C. sakazakii strains to acidic conditions can be assessed based on the pH treatment that had the most significant impact on bacterial survival over short or longterm exposure . Therefore in the current study the acid tolerance of the five C. sakazakii strains can be ranked as follows from most to least tolerant according to the population decreases over a h exposure to 
pH . : strain            =  . At a slightly lower pH value of . EdelsonMammel et al.  reported a similar straindependent acid tolerance of C. sakazakii where the acidsensitive strains showed . and . log reductions over the h exposure at  and the acidresistant strains showed less than a . log reduction. The objective of this initial acid tolerance assessment was to select one acidsensitive and one acidtolerant strain for the SHIME experiment. As such C. sakazakii strain  was chosen as the acidtolerant strain because it showed the least reduction in cell numbers. Since the two acidsensitive strains from 
this study  belong to the same serogroup  strain  was chosen due to its clinical origin although it is unclear whether 
strain origin  significantly affects bacterial fitness in surviving acid or other stresses. There is contradictory information on whether the origin of C. sakazakii strains affects their resistance to acid and other stresses. EdelsonMammel et al.  reported no correlation was observed between the origin of C. sakazakii strains and their acid resistance. However a recent study by Horn and Bhunia  reported that environmental C. sakazakii isolates have evolved several stress responses that may provide them with crossresistance to subsequent stresses present in food production and storage. Furthermore the selected C. sakazakii strains  and  belong to serogroups O and O respectively which are the two serogroups frequently isolated from clinical cases PIF samples and associated manufacturing facilities . It may be possible that there are genetic differences between bacterial serogroups that allow one serogroup to be more tolerant to stresses than others. For example the majority of Listeria monocytogenes serotype b isolates were reported to have enhanced acid tolerance due to the presence of the gene ORF that encodes for a protein similar to HtrA a protein that aids in bacterial survival at low pH and in the presence of other stresses . For C. sakazakii the association between strain origin serogroups and their tolerance or resistance to environmental stresses is unclear and requires further research.  
. Evaluation of survival and gene expression of C. sakazakii in a dynamic simulated newborn stomach in the Simulator of the Human Intestinal and Microbial Ecosystem  
The acidity of the stomach is considered to be a major barrier against infections caused by foodborne pathogens. Pathogenic bacteria that survive the gastric passage can colonize the intestines to cause infection  with the assumption that the bacteria can adapt to the environmental stresses present in the gut. Previous studies have assessed the behaviour of C. sakazakii at a typical infant gastric pH of .. However these studies used a static model with a similar setup to the acid tolerance assessment which does not mimic the gradual acidification that occurs during gastric digestion .  To the author’s knowledge this study is the first to evaluate the behaviour of C. sakazakii within a food matrix using a dynamic gastrointestinal  model that allows a simulation of the gradual acidification of the stomach. The aim of this study was to assess and compare the survival and gene expression of two C. sakazakii strains in PIF selected based on their acid susceptibility using a dynamic GI model called the SHIME to try to simulate as closely as possible the physiological conditions of the stomach of a newborn. An exhaustive review of the literature was done to identify the typical physiological conditions of a newborn’s stomach.  Among the infant age group this study chose to focus on newborns i.e. infants under  months of age because newborns are a highrisk population for developing meningitis from Cronobacter infections  and they have an exclusively milk diet which subsequently affects their digestive physiology . Since the stomach pH of newborns can vary the pH values chosen for this study encompassed the stomach pH that one would see in newborns who are i) healthy; ii) immunocompromised; iii) prematurely born and iv) born through different modes of delivery . The acidification started from initial stomach pH values after feeding of ..  to fasting stomach pH values of . . and . at the end of a h gastric digestion .  
.. Survival of C. sakazakii in a simulated newborn stomach of the SHIME at fasting stomach pH values of . . and . 
The survival results from the SHIME with gradual acidification was different from the acid tolerance assessment where C. sakazakii strains were subjected to a fixed acidic pH . In the SHIME where the gradual decrease in gastric pH was introduced the results showed that regardless of strain susceptibility to acid the two C. sakazakii strains were able to grow at all pH treatments over the course of gastric digestion  in newborns. Both C. sakazakii strains grew best at a treatment pH of . with an increase in levels of . and . log CFU/mL in  h at  for the acidsensitive and tolerant strain respectively . Conversely both strains grew the least during a gastric digestion at treatment pH . showing an increase in numbers of cells by about  log CFU/mL . The differences in bacterial growth between pH treatments could be attributed to the difference in gastric acidification between treatments . When comparing  the different pH treatments the increase in gastric acidity was the most pronounced at the treatment pH of . where the pH decreased by . units in  h suggesting that bacterial cells may have experienced a greater degree of acid stress in this treatment . The pronounced acidification at the treatment pH of . affected the growth of the acidsensitive strain more than the tolerant strain as shown by the significant difference in levels of the acidsensitive strain between pH treatments  which indicates that the acidsensitive strain experienced more acid stress at a lower pH. An increase in bacterial numbers in in vitro stomach dynamic gastrointestinal  models has not been reported in the literature since most dynamic GI models are designed to mimic physiological conditions of adults and not infants . Under the physiological conditions existing in the adult stomach  gradual acidification of the in vitro stomach allowed for survival but a decline in numbers of Escherichia coli O:H  and L. monocytogenes . These studies support the hypothesis that gradual acidification of the stomach appears to allow bacteria to adapt to the acidic pH and survive. In addition to gradual acidification and low acidity  of the in vitro stomach of newborns the nutrientrich PIF added into the SHIME system likely contributed to the growth of C. sakazakii observed in this study. Milk is a highly nutritious growth medium for many microorganisms as it is rich in carbohydrates fat protein vitamins and minerals .  
Furthermore the results of this study showed that there is a difference in the survival of acidsensitive and tolerant C. sakazakii strains when evaluated in the SHIME. In the first  h of all pH treatments the acidtolerant strain grew by about log CFU/mL however the acidsensitive strain grew significantly less than the tolerant strain by about .. log CFU/mL . As the gastric digestion progressed and the stomach pH continued to decrease the acidsensitive strain grew more in cell numbers than the tolerant strain at all pH treatments while the levels of the acidtolerant strain plateaued. The slow growth of the acidsensitive strain in the first  h could be due to a prolonged lag phase. In the lag phase bacterial cells are adapting to new environmental conditions by synthesizing cellular components necessary for survival and growth . Due to the sparse sampling timepoints of the survival study 
i.e. the first sampling was taken  h after inoculation the lag periods of the C. sakazakii strains could not be seen from the graphs. Therefore it cannot be concluded that there is a difference in duration of lag phase between the acidsensitive and tolerant strains. However previous studies have reported that the duration of lag phase can be indicative of the stress tolerance of the bacterial cells i.e. bacteria that have been preadapted to sublethal conditions were shown to have shorter lag periods when exposed to similar stress than nonpreadapted bacteria  and a prolonged lag phase can be seen as a defense mechanism that allows bacteria to tolerate stress . Therefore it is possible that the acidsensitive C. sakazakii strain needed a longer adaptation period than the acidtolerant strain which resulted in the slow growth of the sensitive strain in the first  h of exposure to acidic pH .  
The differences in growth patterns between the two strains may suggest that the acidsensitive strain required a longer adaptation period than the tolerant strain. The acidsensitive strain may not have activated the stress response to adapt to the gastric conditions until the second hour of the gastric digestion and once it was activated the strain was able to grow exponentially. The lengthy gastric digestion together with low acidity gradual acidification and the nutrientrich PIF allowed the acidsensitive strain to adapt to the acidic environment and grow. The ability of acidsusceptible strains to survive gastric acidity was also observed in L. monocytogenes which was exposed to gradual acidification to pH values between . and . in a simulated human adult GI model and which was observed reach the in vitro small intestine in a viable state . Overall the current study has shown that C. sakazakii strains can survive the gastric acidity of a newborn’s stomach. In addition the strains may be able to survive the transit in the small intestines as the duodenal pH in newborns is similar if not less acidic than the stomach pH .   
.. Gene expression in C. sakazakii during exposure to a simulation of the stomach of a newborn using the SHIME at pH treatments of . . and . 
In this study four genes that have been reported to play a role in stress adaptation and virulence of C. sakazakii were evaluated: i) the regulator gene hfq ii) the stress response genes rpoS and grxB and iii) the virulence gene ompA. The expression of the selected genes during the h exposure to each treatment pH was determined by comparing their expression at each timepoint in relation to time  h prior to the gradual acidification. The findings showed that the expression of each gene was dependent on the strain of C. sakazakii the gastric acidity and duration of exposure to the in vitro stomach pH. There is limited information available on the acid adaptation mechanisms of C. sakazakii however this study provides further information on the acid adaptation mechanisms in three areas: i) effects of gastric acidity on gene expression ii) differences in stress adaptation between acidsensitive and tolerant strains and its effects on their survival and iii) whether there are interactions between the four genes evaluated. 
... Expression of the stress genes rpoS and grxB 
The results of the SHIME experiments showed that the growth of C. sakazakii particularly the acidsensitive strain was affected by pH. The findings from the evaluation of rpoS and grxB expression seem to support the survival results and provided insights into how the strains responded to the acid stress. RpoS or sigma factor S  encoded by rpoS is the master regulator of the general stress response in Gramnegative bacteria and is responsible for controlling the expression of  of the bacterial genome . RpoS is induced upon entry into the stationary phase and by stresses such as acids starvation high osmolarity and temperature changes . Under nonstress conditions RpoS levels are low . Therefore the expression of rpoS in this study can be used to evaluate whether the C. sakazakii strains sensed and responded to the acid stress caused by exposure to the acidity in the in vitro stomach over the course of  h. After  h of gastric digestion rpoS was upregulated in both the acidsensitive and tolerant strains at the treatment pH of . but the gene was only upregulated in the acidtolerant strain at the treatment pH values of . and . . Although rpoS was upregulated in both strains after  h of exposure to treatment pH . the expression was significantly higher in the acidtolerant strain than in the sensitive strain. These findings may suggest that the acidtolerant strain started to adapt to acid stress in the first  h of exposure to gastric acidity while the acidsensitive strain may have not displayed a stress response in the first  h. In previous studies an increase in rpoS expression in C. sakazakii and E. coli has been associated with an increase in numbers of culturable cells  as RpoSdependent stress response enables cells to survive various stresses . This was observed in the survival results of the current study which showed that the levels of the acidtolerant strain at  h were higher than the acidsensitive strain at all pH treatments . Therefore the findings of this study seem to support the theory that the upregulation of rpoS and potentially the activation of RpoSdependent stress response contributes to the ability of bacterial cells to survive environmental stress.  
As the in vitro stomach pH continued to decrease to reach the fasting stomach pH value at  h both C. sakazakii strains were still responding to stress as shown by the upregulation of rpoS at  h for all pH treatments . For the acidtolerant strain the expression of rpoS increased from  to  h as fasting pH values of . and . were reached but the expression decreased at the fasting pH value of . . The decline in rpoS expression at pH . may suggest that the bacterial cells had adapted to the acidic pH and did not need as much RpoS to overcome the acid stress. However in the acidsensitive strain the expression of rpoS increased from  to  h at all pH treatments . The results showed that the increase in rpoS expression at all treatments was greater in the acidsensitive strain than the tolerant strain which suggests that the 
RpoSdependent stress response in the acidsensitive strain was activated between  to  h of gastric digestion. This may help to explain the exponential growth of the acidsensitive strain from  to  h of gastric digestion .  
Furthermore the change  in rpoS expression from  to  h can also be compared between pH treatments to assess whether the C. sakazakii strains experienced the same level of acid stress at all pH treatments. For both the acidsensitive and tolerant strain the increase in rpoS expression can be ranked as follows: pH .  pH .  pH .. It seems like there may be a correlation between rpoS expression and the level of acidification of the in vitro stomach at pH treatments. The increase in rpoS expression from  to  h in both strains was observed to be the highest at the treatment pH value of . where the decrease in pH over  h was the most pronounced among all pH treatments . As previously discussed in section .. the level of gradual acidification affected the growth of both C. sakazakii strains during gastric digestion particularly the acidsensitive strain with the lowest populations being observed after h of gastric digestion at the treatment pH of .. Davis et al.  also observed significantly higher levels of RpoS in E. coli at a lower pH  where the bacterial levels were lower at pH . than at pH .. These findings suggest that the bacterial cells experienced a higher level of acid stress in a more acidic environment as reflected by the slow growth. The gradual acidification during gastric digestion allowed bacteria to adapt by upregulating the stress response gene rpoS which in turn increased the level of RpoS and consequently helped to modulate the RpoSdependent stress response to provide the cells with the ability to survive. The RpoSdependent stress response is activated by altering the transcription function of the RNA polymerase and some of the RpoScontrolled changes include changes in cell envelope composition and cell morphology . 
However it is worth noting that RpoS is a general stress response regulator therefore it cannot be concluded that the increase in expression of rpoS was only caused by the acidification of the in vitro stomach. Another form of stress that could be present in this study and could contribute to the expression of rpoS is the competition for nutrients at high cell density. In E. coli rpoS was also expressed when the populations of cells reached  CFU/mL  however this has not been explored in C. sakazakii. The design of the current study only used the stomach compartment of the SHIME which did not consider the emptying of gastric contents into the small intestine during digestion. In a continuous SHIME experiment the volume of the gastric contents would decrease overtime as some of the volume potentially containing bacteria would be transferred into the small intestine. However since the volume of the gastric contents in this study did not change a cell density of  CFU/mL was reached by both strains at the end of the h exposure at all pH treatments. Therefore it is possible that the bacterial cells were competing for nutrients and this could have been perceived as a form of stress by C. sakazakii.     
The other stress gene examined in this study was grxB which encodes for GrxB an important component of the Glutaredoxin  system . Under nonstress conditions GrxB contributes up to  of total Grx activities which include formation of deoxyribonucleotides during DNA synthesis control of protein folding signal transduction and regulation of metabolic activity such as growth and apoptosis . When exposed to an acidic pH of . for a long duration  Ling et al.  found that the growth of a grxBdeleted mutant strain of C. sakazakii was delayed when compared to the wildtype strain indicating that grxB may be needed for acid adaptation. An upregulation of grxB in C. sakazakii was also observed during a min exposure to a fixed pH of . . 
It is thought that under an acidic pH GrxB contributes to the consumption of intracellular protons that aids in the acid adaptation of C. sakazakii .  
In the current study grxB was upregulated in both strains throughout the h gastric digestion at all pH treatments which may support the role that grxB plays in acid adaptation . As the in vitro stomach pH reached the fasting pH values the expression of grxB in the acidsensitive strain increased significantly from  to  h at all pH treatments . Previous research has observed an increase in grxB expression and levels of GrxB protein in C. sakazakii  and E. coli  in acidchallenge studies. The increase in grxB expression observed in the current study could indicate that the acidsensitive strain was adapting to the acidification of the in vitro stomach model. However in the acidtolerant strain the expression of grxB at all pH treatments decreased significantly from  to  h . A decline in grxB expression under acidic pH has been previously observed in C. sakazakii that lost their culturability after a min exposure to pH .  however this was not observed in the current study. It may be possible that the acidtolerant strain had adapted to the acidic environment after  h and no longer needed a high level of GrxB to survive as indicated by the logarithmic growth in the first  h followed by a slow growth in the last  h of gastric digestion. The early acid adaptation of the acidtolerant strain may have been the result of the overexpression of grxB at  h for all pH treatments. When comparing the grxB expression of the acidtolerant strain at  h between pH treatments grxB was expressed the highest at  h of pH . while the expression at treatment pH values of . and . were similar. At  h of treatment with pH . the in vitro stomach pH had decreased from . to .. Since the decrease in pH was minor in comparison to the acidification in the other pH treatments it is possible that the acidtolerant strain was performing normal cellular functions for the first  h of exposure to the treatment pH of .. 
It has been reported that in addition to having a role in acid adaptation grxB also plays an important role in DNA synthesis under nonstress conditions .  
It has been proposed by Ling et al.  that the expression of grxB in C. sakazakii upon exposure to acid is positively regulated by RpoS and guanosine pentaphosphate  and the findings from the current study seem to agree with the proposed RpoSmediated mechanism. An increase in grxB expression was observed in both strains when rpoS expression was increased. In the acidsensitive strain the increase in expression of rpoS and grxB from  to  h of gastric digestion was the highest at the treatment pH value of . and lowest at the treatment pH value of .. Furthermore in the acidtolerant strain a decrease in grxB expression from  to  h at treatment pH . was observed in conjunction with a decline in rpoS expression.  This appears to support the previous finding that at pH . the acidtolerant strain experienced the least acid stress. This study also found that at all pH treatments the changes in expression of grxB and rpoS from  to  h were higher in the acidsensitive strain than in the acidtolerant strain. This supports the theory that the acidsensitive C. sakazakii strain had a slower acid adaptation response as compared to the acidtolerant strain. The findings of this study also suggest that in addition to the RpoSdependent expression of grxB proposed by Ling et al.  there is a possibility that grxB may be expressed independently of RpoS at a less acidic pH. For example at  h of treatment pH 
. and . grxB was upregulated in the acidsensitive strain while rpoS was downregulated. Potamitou et al.  suggested that an RpoSindependent grxB mechanism in E. coli may be activated under oxidative stress and/or depending on the bacterial growth phase and the sigma factor expressed at that phase. However further research needs to be conducted to evaluate whether this RpoSindependent grxB mechanism can be induced in C. sakazakii under acidic conditions.  
Based on the expression of rpoS and grxB and the SHIME survival results this study suggests that the combination of low acidity gradual acidification of the stomach and lengthy gastric digestion time creates a favourable environment for the development of an acid adaptation response in C. sakazakii strains that allows the strains regardless of the acid susceptibility to survive and grow in an acidic pH environment. A previous study by Arnold et al.  reported that Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium with an induced acidtolerance response to pH . displayed a crossresistance to other environmental stresses. Therefore it is possible that the acidadapted C. sakazakii strains in this study could be crossprotected against subsequent stresses in the small intestines of newborns where the secretion of bile salts enzymes and presence of organic acids may contribute a higher level of stress to the bacterial cells . The duodenal pH in newborns is .. with a similar transit time  as the stomach . Therefore it may be possible for crossresistant or crosstolerant C. sakazakii strains to develop a stress response and survive passage through the stomach and small intestines especially if they are in the stationary phase as in general stationaryphase cells are more resistant to environmental stresses than other growth phases .  
... Expression of the virulence gene ompA 
Previous studies have reported that the outer membrane protein A  plays an important role in the invasion of the human intestinal epithelial cells and human brain microvascular endothelial cells . In the current study there was no consistent pattern observed in the expression of ompA in the acidsensitive and tolerant C. sakazakii strains. In the acidsensitive strain ompA was upregulated at all pH treatments and the gene expression increased as the in vitro stomach pH decreased to its fasting pH values . The expression of ompA at the end of gastric digestion was similar between all pH treatments suggesting that ompA expression may not be affected by the level of acidification. The upregulation of ompA at acidic pH was also observed in C. sakazakii  and E. coli . Wang  suggested that there is an OmpAattributed stress resistance in E. coli activated in the exponential phase that contributes to the survival of bacteria under acidic and osmotic stress. Currently it is not known whether OmpAdependent stress resistance exists in C. sakazakii. 
In contrast in the acidtolerant strain ompA was upregulated in gastric digestion at the treatment pH value of . and the gene expression did not change from  to  h of exposure . However the expression of ompA from  to  h significantly increased at the treatment pH value of .  and decreased at the treatment pH value of . . It is unclear why the ompA expression at the treatment pH value of . decreased from  to  h and became downregulated at the end of the h exposure. This pattern of ompA regulation in a low acidic pH  environment has not been reported in C. sakazakii or other Enterobacteriaceae. A potential explanation for the downregulation of ompA could be the autoregulation of ompA that is needed to maintain a stable level of OmpA for the stability of the outermembranepeptidoglycan .  
The expression of ompA may contribute to the virulence potential of the acidsensitive and tolerant strains as they pass through the GI tract. However the virulence of C. sakazakii also depends among other things on whether the bacteria can survive the subsequent stresses present in the lower gastrointestinal tract i.e. bile salts organic acids and competition with the gut microbiota .  Furthermore ompA expression alone does not contribute to the overall pathogenesis of C. sakazakii. There is limited research on the role of some putative virulence genes such as ompX ompW  and fliC . Additionally it is unclear whether the h exposure to simulated gastric conditions is enough for C. sakazakii to express virulence factors as pathogens require specific environmental cues to express virulence factors .  
... Expression of the regulator gene hfq  
Hfq encoded by hfq is an RNA chaperone that regulates the expression of several stress and virulence genes at the posttranscriptional level in C. sakazakii and other Enterobacteriaceae such as E. coli and Salmonella . In E. coli Hfq is needed for the efficient translation of rpoS mRNA to RpoS in various stress conditions  by facilitating the binding of the appropriate noncodingRNAs to rpoS mRNA . This section will discuss whether a hfqrpoS relationship was observed in C. sakazakii strains that were exposed to varying gastric acidities in the SHIME system.  
A positive correlation between hfq and rpoS was observed in the acidsensitive and tolerant strains during the h exposure to the treatment pH of .. The hfq gene was upregulated in both strains at  and  h of treatment . An upregulation of hfq during exposure to environmental stresses was also observed in C. sakazakii strain YrtA in an acidchallenge at pH .  and upon desiccation  suggesting that Hfq is needed for stress adaptation. As the in vitro stomach model pH reached pH . the expression of hfq in both strains increased by . times from  to  h and a similar trend was also observed within rpoS. Similar to rpoS the increase in hfq expression was also greater in the acidsensitive strain than the acidtolerant strain  suggesting that a positive correlation between rpoS and hfq may be exhibited at the treatment pH value of .. It has been reported that Hfq is needed for the translation of rpoS to RpoS in E. coli  however due to the limitations of this study i.e. we did not measure the levels of the corresponding gene products the findings are not definitive enough to propose that the Hfqdependent RpoS mechanism was exhibited in the two C. sakazakii strains evaluated in this study.  
The correlation between hfq and rpoS for the treatment pH values of . and . was not as evident as with the treatment pH of .. In the acidsensitive strain the hfq gene was upregulated at  h for the treatment pH values of . and . however rpoS was downregulated  suggesting a nonRpoSregulating role of Hfq. Besides rpoS Hfq also modulates the expression of many other stress and virulence genes . It is possible that since rpoS was not yet expressed in the acidsensitive strain Hfq may be regulating other genes. The hfq gene became downregulated at pH .  demonstrating a decrease in hfq expression from  to  h in the acidsensitive strain . Conversely rpoS was upregulated in the acidsensitive strain at  h for the treatment pH value of . and an increase in rpoS expression was observed from  to  h. The negative correlation between hfq and rpoS observed may be explained in two ways: i) autoregulation of hfq  and/or ii) Hfqindependent rpoS regulation . In E. coli hfq is tightly autoregulated at the translational step by destabilization of the hfq mRNA to maintain the cellular Hfq concentration within a limited range  which may explain the downregulation of hfq. Since the concentration of Hfq is stably maintained an Hfqdependent rpoS regulation may still take place. However it has been shown that small or noncodingRNAs and mRNAs compete for Hfq binding within the cell . In E. coli a noncodingRNA called DsrA is responsible for Hfqindependent rpoS regulation . However it has not been reported whether a DsrAmediated rpoS regulation exists in 
C. sakazakii. Different results however were observed at  h for the treatment pH of .. Here hfq and rpoS were upregulated and the expression of both genes in the acidsensitive strain increased from  to  h . It is possible that Hfq may have contributed to the posttranscriptional regulation of rpoS and/or other genes to support the growth of the acidsensitive strain under an acidic environment.   
In the acidtolerant strain the expression of hfq at  and  h of the treatment pH . was the opposite to that of the sensitive strain . In the acidtolerant strain hfq was downregulated at  h of the treatment pH . but rpoS was upregulated . As previously discussed the downregulation of hfq may be caused by the autoregulation of Hfq in the cells and the posttranscriptional rpoS regulation may still be dependent on Hfq or may be mediated by DsrA. When the in vitro stomach model pH reached . at  h hfq became upregulated demonstrating an increase in expression from  h. Simultaneously an increase in rpoS expression from  to  h was also observed . The upregulation of both genes suggests that more Hfq was needed to be expressed for rpoS regulation and/or other stress genes for survival and growth. At  h of treatment pH . hfq and rpoS were upregulated in the acidtolerant strain  suggesting a potential Hfqdependent rpoS regulation as a response to initial acidification of the in vitro stomach. When pH . was reached at  h hfq became downregulated which suggests that hfq transcription was no longer needed due to the presence of sufficient intracellular Hfq levels .  
Throughout this section the supporting evidence for the potential relationship between hfq and rpoS was heavily extrapolated from studies on E. coli and Salmonella as hfq/Hfq has been well studied in both pathogens. However Chao and Vogel  reported variability in the role of Hfq for different pathogens.  Therefore it may be worthwhile to further study the roles of Hfq and their regulated pathways in C. sakazakii to better understand gene regulation under various stresses.  
Overall the results obtained from the survival and gene expression of C. sakazakii in the in vitro stomach of the SHIME suggest that C. sakazakii regardless of its acid susceptibility developed an acid or stress adaptation response that allowed it to survive and grow during the h exposure to the simulated gastric conditions. The findings also showed that at all pH treatments particularly at the treatment pH value of . the acidsensitive strain grew slower than the acidtolerant strain which could be due to a large adaptation period to the acidification of the in vitro stomach. The combination of low acidity  and lengthy gastric digestion in newborns allows for the development of an acid or stress adaptation response to survive the gastric conditions which may also crossprotect them against subsequent stresses in the rest of the GI 
tract.  
. Induction and resuscitation of viable but nonculturable  cells of 
C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF 
.. Artificial inoculation of PIF using a dryinoculation technique 
PIF samples were individually spiked with three single strains of stationaryphase C. 
sakazakii  using a dry inoculation method that involved ) preparation of seeding PIF inoculum ) desiccation of the seeding inoculum to reestablish the PIF preinoculated water activity and ) artificiallyinoculating PIF with the desiccated seeding inoculum. This inoculation method reduced the levels of C. sakazakii by  logs suggesting that some of the bacterial cells were lost during the desiccation of the seeding PIF inoculum. Liu et al.  also reported a similar loss in bacterial cells after inoculating Salmonella into nonfat milk powder with a similar dryinoculation method. The artificiallyinoculated PIF was used in two separate experiments: i) induction of VBNC cells by thermal treatment  and resuscitation  and ii) effect of water temperature on C. sakazakii during the rehydration of nonthermallytreated artificiallyinoculated PIF .  
.. The effect of thermal treatment on culturability of C. sakazakii in artificially
inoculated PIF 
PIF may contain viable but nonculturable  C. sakazakii cells that have been induced by the drying step of milk or added in with dry ingredients. To closely mimic the timetemperature conditions of spray drying of milk the artificiallyinoculated PIF was subjected to various timetemperature combinations to evaluate whether the thermal treatment could facilitate the induction of VBNC C. sakazakii cells. After a thermal treatment of  for  seconds all three C. sakazakii strains were unculturable indicating that the cells may have died and/or have entered the VBNC state. This study used a culturebased method to assess bacterial entry into the VBNC state to replicate the routine methods used for microbial analysis of milk powder . Therefore the observation of zero colonies on the neat plate i.e. plated without serial dilution can indicate if the heattreated bacterial cells are dead or if viable if some of the bacterial cells may have entered the VBNC state. The thermal treatment used in this study  inactivated more than  logs of C. sakazakii cells . The observed log reduction was . logs greater than that obtained in a similar study by Lang et al. . The difference in logarithmic inactivation could be due to the different C. sakazakii strains used in the two studies. 
 The thermal treatment used in this study was the timetemperature combination that resulted in all C. sakazakii cells being unculturable in the thermallytreated artificiallyinoculated milk powder . There are other VBNC induction methods described in the literature such as exposure to chlorine or low pH however thermal inactivation best represents the stress that C. sakazakii would face in PIF manufacturing facilities. The temperature used in this study was lower than the temperatures of spray dryers used in manufacturing facilities . However the log reduction achieved in the current study is similar to the thermal inactivation reported by DewantiHariyadi et al.  where . logs of C. sakazakii were inactivated in a mini spraydryer operating similarly to the one used in manufacturing facilities. This suggests that the thermal treatment used in the current study fairly closely mimicks the spray drying conditions used in the dairy industry.  
.. Resuscitation of VBNC C. sakazakii cells through reconstitution of the thermallytreated artificiallyinoculated PIF in  and  water 
Previous studies have reported that VBNC cells can be recovered through the removal of stress however resuscitation conditions vary between and within species . Resuscitated VBNC cells have been reported to display improved metabolic activity and restored culturability . Several stimuli for the recovery of VBNC cells include an increase in nutrient concentration a change in temperature and the addition of chemicals . Hati et al.  successfully resuscitated acidinduced VBNC cells of C. sakazakii by incubating them at  in tryptic soy broth  and TSB supplemented with catalase sodium pyruvate or Tween . However if VBNC C. sakazakii cells are present in PIF it would be useful to know whether the simple rehydration of PIF can trigger their resuscitation as this would better represent a reallife scenario. Ingestion of resuscitated cells may pose risks to the hosts due to potential retained or increased virulence . To the author’s knowledge the ability of VBNC C. sakazakii cells to resuscitate through rehydration of PIF has not been explored. The water temperatures used in this study for reconstitution of the PIF were selected based on the recommended preparation of PIF as suggested by government organizations as well as the company labels that appear on PIF containers.  A water temperature of  is recommended by FAO and WHO  CDC  and Health Canada  however the manufacturer of the PIF used in this study suggested reconstitution in boiled water that has been cooled to .  
The findings of this study showed that VBNC C. sakazakii cells can be resuscitated through extended incubation periods at  regardless of the water temperature  used to rehydrate the thermallytreated artificiallyinoculated PIF . The manufacturer’s recommended storage conditions for reconstituted PIF  was not sufficient to facilitate resuscitation of the VBNC cells. However some of the VBNC cells were resuscitated when the reconstituted PIF was stored at a higher temperature for a longer period of time  as shown by an increase of  to  log CFU/mL in levels of C. sakazakii. After  h the levels of C. sakazakii continued to increase reaching approximately  log CFU/mL after  h. The resuscitation could be stimulated by a combination of the following physical and chemical triggers: temperature upshift from  to  a long storage time and the fact that reconstituted PIF is a rich growth medium . This study demonstrates that if rehydrated PIF containing VBNC cells of C. sakazakii is ingested the body temperature  and length of gastric digestion  in newborns can potentially facilitate the resuscitation of the VBNC cells of C. sakazakii and the pathogen can potentially continue to grow as it travels through the GI tract  and possibly cause infection in the host. Some foodborne pathogens are known to retain their virulence properties after exiting from the VBNC state i.e. when they are resuscitated . However there are other factors not examined in this study that can act to prevent the resuscitation of VBNC cells. These factors include but are not limited to varying gastric acidities among newborns secretion of bile salts and enzymes along the GI tract and the host’s immune system .  
 The effect of water temperature on the resuscitation of heatinduced VBNC cells was observed to be straindependent. All strains showed signs of resuscitation after  h of incubation at . Among the three strains tested the VBNC cells of C. sakazakii strain  recovered the best after the  h of incubation at  and the culturable counts of this strain in  and  reconstituted PIF were similar . In contrast the resuscitation of VBNC cells of strains  and  was significantly lower in the PIF reconstituted at  rather than .  It is possible that strain  was more resistant to desiccation and heat than the other two strains. Although heat was used in this study to induce the formation of VBNC cells some C. sakazakii cells could have also been injured from the desiccation method used to prepare the seeding PIF inoculum . Typically bacteria prefer a water activity  of around . or greater to grow therefore bacterial survival after desiccation  of the seeding PIF inoculum to reestablish the preinoculum aw will largely depend on their resistance or tolerance to osmotic and/or dry stress as drying is an extreme form of osmotic stress . Although desiccation and heat can induce the formation of VBNC cells resistance to one or all stress may prevent all bacterial cells from entering the VBNC state . Given that a culturebased method was used in the current study to assess the presence of VBNC cells it is possible that the culturable counts observed after  h of incubation at  were from the growth of some residual nonVBNC cells that were not detected on the agar plates . Some of the thermallyinactivated C. sakazakii cells may also be persister cells. By definition persister cells describe a subpopulation of stationaryphase cells that exhibit temporary antibiotic tolerance due to their ability to enter a temporal dormant state . VBNC and persister cells can be induced by the same stresses and can be found together within the same bacterial population . Furthermore persisters are believed to be a transitional dormant state between active and VBNC cells and have a higher metabolic activity than VBNC cells therefore persisters can be resuscitated faster than VBNC cells upon removal of a stress . Similar to VBNC cells persisters cannot be detected through culturebased methods . Regardless of the dormant state the results of this study suggest that unculturable C. sakazakii cells can become culturable in PIF that is rehydrated with either  or  water. Therefore it raises the importance of having a rapid and reliable method for example propidiumor ethidium monoazideqPCR  or ATPbased methods  to detect the presence of VBNC cells in PIF.  
. The effect of water temperature on C. sakazakii cells in reconstituted nonthermallytreated artificiallyinoculated PIF  
In addition to the absence of C. sakazakii and other foodborne pathogens in PIF the safety of reconstituted PIF is also affected by its preparation method. It is presumed that most 
Cronobacter cases of human illness involve the growth of the bacterium after rehydration of the PIF . The potential presence of VBNC C. sakazakii cells in PIF was addressed in section . which showed that thermal treatment fairly similar to the timetemperature of spray drying applied to artificiallyinoculated PIF can induce the formation of VBNC cells. However C. sakazakii may also be present in PIF in a nonVBNC state. In this section water at  and  was used to reconstitute artificiallyinoculated PIF which was not exposed to the thermal treatment for VBNC induction to evaluate whether a higher water temperature can significantly reduce the levels of culturable C. sakazakii as proposed by public health government bodies . 
Reconstitution of nonthermallytreated artificiallyinoculated PIF with  water significantly reduced the initial numbers of C. sakazakii strains  and  by . and . logs respectively in comparison to rehydration with  water . The culturable counts of strain  in artificiallyinoculated PIF reconstituted with  water were . logs lower than the reconstitution with  however the differences were not significant. Therefore it seems that the effect of the water rehydration temperature on C. sakazakii levels in reconstituted nonthermallytreated artificiallyinoculated PIF was straindependent. Similar to the observations made with the resuscitation of VBNC cells we did not observe any increase in the numbers of C. sakazakii cells when storing reconstituted PIF at room temperature for  h. Several studies have also reported that reconstitution of PIF with  water significantly reduced the levels of culturable C. sakazakii . EdelsonMammel and Buchanan  reported a log reduction of a heatresistant C. sakazakii strain in 
PIF rehydrated with  and found that only temperatures of ? can instantaneously inactivate C. sakazakii. When PIF is found to be naturallycontaminated with C. sakazakii it is usually present at levels of about . CFU/ g  which equates to .. CFU per  mL serving of reconstituted PIF . The findings of this study showed that rehydration with  water could reduce the number of C. sakazakii by a range of . to . log CFU/mL. If the contamination of PIF in reallife settings falls within the natural contamination level i.e. below . CFU/ mL or . log CFU/ mL  based on the range of reduction in C. sakazakii obtained in this study rehydration of PIF with  water would eliminate C. sakazakii. However if the contamination is above the natural reported contamination levels for example if PIF was crosscontaminated at the caregiver level hydration with  water may not eliminate all C. sakazakii. Furthermore the results also showed that the C. sakazakii cells can grow in reconstituted PIF upon incubation at  for  h which mimicked the human body temperature and the length of gastric digestion. Therefore if C. sakazakii in contaminated PIF is not eliminated it is possible that the pathogens may pose a risk to newborns if ingested. Regardless of the water temperature used to reconstitute the PIF all three C. sakazakii strains evaluated in this study grew in the reconstituted PIF upon incubation at  for  and  h which mimicked the time and temperature of transit in the stomach and the entire GI tract of newborns respectively . All strains grew by  logs after  h of incubation and grew around another  to  logs after  h of incubation. The incubation conditions did not consider the gastric acidity and/or intestinal conditions however the SHIME survival results  showed that C. sakazakii was able to grow under stress conditions of the in vitro stomach. Therefore it is possible that if the reconstituted PIF ingested by a newborn contains some C. sakazakii these bacterial cells can grow at the very least in the stomach of newborns. 
This study provides supporting arguments for the need of a global consensus on the safe preparation of PIF and for this recommendation to be routinely included on the labels of all PIF cans distributed in all countries. Generally the level of Cronobacter spp. or C. sakazakii contamination in PIF is low therefore reconstitution of PIF with  water should be sufficient to eliminate the pathogen. However speciallyformulated PIF such as those containing probiotics and heatsensitive ingredients cannot be reconstituted with  water due to concerns that the high temperature might compromise the added health benefits . Having different recommended water temperatures to reconstitute PIF and speciallyformulated PIF may be needed to ensure inactivation of C. sakazakii and other foodborne pathogens that may already be present in the milk powder and/or may have crosscontaminated the PIF from the use of dirty utensils and other sources. Furthermore since the current practices in PIF production cannot ensure the sterility of PIF development of novel technologies that eliminate foodborne pathogens in the final product is necessary. One novel combination inactivation method that has been reported to eliminate C. sakazakii in PIF is the simultaneous application of nearinfrared heating and UV irradiation that was reported to provide a synergistic lethal effect on C. sakazakii without compromising the sensory properties of PIF . However further assessment is needed to assess the feasibility and cost to implement such applications in a largescale setting. Furthermore more research is needed to develop novel inactivation approaches for inactivating foodborne pathogens in PIF.  
. Considerations limitations and future work 
This study focused on the behaviour of C. sakazakii under in vitro gastric conditions of newborns and the ability of C. sakazakii to enter the VBNC state and be resuscitated in the preparation of PIF. While the results of this study provide further insights into the acid adaptation mechanism of C. sakazakii in gastric conditions of newborns and the VBNC state of C. sakazakii there are a number of limitations that will be discussed in this section. This section also gives directions for future research to further advance the understanding of C. sakazakii behaviour in the 
GI tract of newborns. 
.. Inoculum level 
The inoculum level of C. sakazakii used in this study was higher than the natural contamination level of C. sakazakii in powdered infant formula . The use of a high inoculum level in the acid tolerance assessment allowed for the observation of changes in levels of C. sakazakii strains over time under various acidic pH treatments. A high level of inoculum i.e.  log CFU/mL was also used by AlvarezOrdóñez et al.  in assessing the acid stress response of a C. sakazakii strain at pH .. Furthermore the dry inoculation of PIF in the VBNC experiment showed that an aqueous inoculum concentration of  log CFU/g was needed to form a substantial pellet after centrifugation for a more precise weighbyweight inoculation of PIF. The use of a high inoculum level in a dryinoculation technique is not unusual as previous studies by Lang et al.  and Liu  used ~ log CFU/g of inoculum to achieve a target inoculation of  log CFU/g in milk powder.  
.. Limitations and future work: SHIME 
Using the SHIME as a human GI model provides a better simulation of the in vivo stomach of newborns than static gut models however the setup of the SHIME system in this study overlooked certain aspects of gastric digestion that could affect the behaviour of C. sakazakii in the stomach: i) the transfer of gastric contents from the stomach to the small intestine and ii) the secretion of gastric lipase that contributes to fat digestion of milk. Gastric lipase was not added in this study since human gastric lipase or alternatives are not yet commercially available . When it is made available in the future gastric lipase could potentially be added in future studies to the SHIME or other dynamic systems modelling the stomach of newborns since the slightly acidic pH of the newborn’s stomach  is optimal for lipase activity.  
Furthermore this study shows that the SHIME is an effective dynamic in vitro model of the human GI tract as it can mimic the in vivo conditions. Since there is currently a lack of studies on C. sakazakii and other Cronobacter spp. in newborns and/or infants it would be valuable to use the complete SHIME system i.e. mimicking the entire GI tract from the stomach to the large intestines to further study the behaviour of C. sakazakii in PIF as it travels through the newborn’s digestive system. Evaluating more than two C. sakazakii strains e.g. one from each serogroup would provide a better and more representative understanding of the microorganism. Additionally supplementing the SHIME with a tissue culture experiment using Caco cells would provide additional information on the pathogenicity of C. sakazakii. This additional work would potentially help to estimate the number of viable C. sakazakii needed to cause infections in newborns which is not currently available.  
There is limited literature on the stress response genes in C. sakazakii and other Cronobacter spp. Therefore the selection of genes in this study was made based on the most studied genes in the genus and other Enterobacteriaceae and are not acidstress specific. In a recent publication on a global transcriptomic analysis of C. sakazakii Zhou et al.  listed various genes that are responsible for acid tolerance response in C. sakazakii. It would be valuable to evaluate the expression of these acidstress genes in the in vitro stomach of the SHIME. 
.. Limitations and future work: C. sakazakii in VBNC state 
This study showed that thermal treatment at  for  seconds seemed to be sufficient to induce the formation of VBNC C. sakazakii cells in artificiallyinoculated PIF. However to the best of our knowledge thermal treatment has not been reported to be able to induce the formation of persister cells. At present persister cells are understood to exhibit a temporal dormancy upon exposure to antibiotics starvation low pH and/or oxidative stress . Persister and VBNC cells can be induced by the same stresses and can coexist  therefore it may be possible that the thermal treatment could potentially induce the formation of both dormant cells. However our experiment was not designed to discern between the two types of dormant cells.  
In an ideal situation it would be worthwhile to conduct a longterm study of the VBNC state of C. sakazakii in PIF. This. In a longterm study thermallytreated artificiallyinoculated PIF can be stored in an airtight container for up to  years or up to the expiry date as EdelsonMammel et al.  have shown that C. sakazakii could be recovered from PIF that was stored for a lengthy period. Throughout the shelflife the VBNC C. sakazakii cells can be evaluated for resuscitation by rehydration of PIF with water to mimic reallife preparation of PIF in hospitals and homes. Furthermore the use of the SHIME system to mimic the newborn’s GI tract can further assess the physiology or survival of VBNC C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF and subsequently reconstituted PIF. This SHIME experiment could provide valuable insights into the behaviour of resuscitated VBNC C. sakazakii under simulated GI tract conditions and compare this behaviour to that of nonVBNC C. sakazakii. 

A  Optimization of sterilization of powdered infant formula  
A. Materials and methods 
PIF was prepared in a glass bottle as described in section ... Reconstituted PIF was exposed to the following sterilization methods: ) boiling at  ±  water for   and  min ) autoclaving at  for  min  ) autoclaving at  for  min ) autoclaving at  for  min and ) autoclaving at  for  min. Sterility of the reconstituted PIF was assessed by plating  the cooled heattreated milk onto BA. Plates were incubated at  for  h then followed by incubation at  for  h with inspection every  h. To confirm that the background bacteria were eliminated the remaining heattreated milk was stored at  for  h and plated for sterility as previously described. The pH of the heattreated milk was measured to ensure that the treatments did not alter the milk pH which could indicate browning . The pH and colour of the heattreated milk were compared to those of nonheattreated reconstituted PIF. Heat treatment was chosen based on their efficacy in eliminating PIF background bacteria without altering the colour and pH of the milk. 
A. Results 
The effects of several heat treatments on sterility pH and browning of reconstituted PIF were evaluated on two lots of PIF and compared to each parameter of nonheattreated reconstituted PIF . Treatments were considered successful in eliminating PIF background bacteria if no colonies were observed on blood agar after the heat treatment and after storage at  for  h which assessed potential recovery of the background bacteria. Out of the 
 treatments tested only three autoclaving methods were successful in eliminating PIF background bacteria. However only the treatment at  for  mins where the water submerged onethird of the milk container did not alter the color and pH of the reconstituted milk after sterilization. 
Therefore this method was chosen as the PIF sterilization method for the SHIME experiment. 
A  Smallscale mock SHIME experiment at pH . 
A. Materials and methods 
Seeding cultures of C. sakazakii strains  and  were prepared by inoculating  mL of LB broth with a single bacterial colony and incubating at   rpm  for  h. An overnight culture of each strain was prepared by inoculating LB broth with the seeding culture to reach an OD of .. and incubating at   rpm for  h. A mixture containing an equal volume of SGF and sterilized PIF and pepsin at  U/mL was inoculated with the overnight culture to achieve an inoculum level of  x  CFU C. sakazakii/mL. The mixture was incubated at   rpm for  h. Throughout incubation the pH of the mixture was adjusted every  min with . M HCl and/or . M NaOH to obtain the pH profile shown in Table A. Samples were taken at    and  h plated  on LB agar and R&F Cronobacter agar and incubated at  for  h. Bacterial colonies on both agar media were counted and analyzed for significant differences . The experiment was conducted once and samples were plated in triplicates. 
The volumes of HCl and NaOH tabulated in Table A were determined through an experiment with a similar setup as mentioned above however no pathogen was added due to a 
“no pathogen” restriction on the pH meter. pH profile was calculated as described in section 
.... 
 	 
A. Results 
The populations C. sakazakii strains  and  in this mock experiment were enumerated on nonselective LB agar and R&F Cronobacter selective agar. At each sampling point the populations of both strains were observed to be higher on LB agar however the difference was found to be statistically insignificant . Furthermore there were concerns that contamination might occur during the SHIME experiment since the system was placed in a nonsterile environment. For these reasons the selective R&F Cronobacter agar was used as the growth medium to quantify the C. sakazakii in SHIME experiment. 
 
iii 
 

iii 
 





iii 
 







2 
 

1 
 



 
 





1 
 

1 
 



1 
 





1 
 

1 
 



1 
 







1 
 









1 
 

1 
 



1 
 





1 
 

1 
 

 
 
Table 

1 
 

