Conclusion 
The main goals of this study were to i) assess the survival of C. sakazakii strains in the stomach of newborns using a dynamic in vitro model called the Simulator of the Human Intestinal and Microbial Ecosystem  ii) evaluate the expression of stress virulence and regulator genes of C. sakazakii as it travels through the stomach compartment of the SHIME iii) artificially inoculate powdered infant formula  and assess the induction of and resuscitation of VBNC C. sakazakii through rehydration of PIF and iv) evaluate the inactivation effect of water temperatures on C. sakazakii in  artificiallyinoculated rehydrated PIF. 
This study is the first to evaluate the behaviour of C. sakazakii in a food matrix and simulated gastric fluid using a dynamic in vitro human GI tract called the SHIME. The computercontrolled SHIME system was used to simulate the gradual acidification of the newborn’s stomach over the duration of gastric digestion therefore the findings of this study should better reflect the behaviour of C. sakazakii in vivo. Based on the survival and expression of the stress genes  both the acidsensitive and acidtolerant strains survived and grew in the simulated gastric conditions and appeared to develop an adaptation to acid during the h gastric digestion with fasting pH values of . . and .. Furthermore the acidsensitive strain was shown to require a longer adaptation period than the acidtolerant strain when exposed to all pH treatments. Overall this study suggests that the gastric conditions of newborns i.e. gradual acidification low stomach acidity  and lengthy digestion time can allow C. sakazakii to develop an acid adaptation response to survive the mildly acidic environment of the newborn’s stomach. The acidadapted C. sakazakii strain may be crossprotected against other stresses that the pathogen could encounter in the rest of the GI tract thus potentially facilitating the survival of the organism and establishment of an infection. 
A thermal treatment of  for  seconds which fairly closely mimics the spraydrying conditions used in the dairy industry was enough to induce C. sakazakii in artificiallyinoculated PIF into the VBNC state as determined by the conventional plating method on a nonselective agar. This study is the first to examine whether reconstitution of PIF with water followed by subjecting it to several storage or incubation periods can resuscitate VBNC C. sakazakii cells that may be present in the PIF. Upon reconstitution of the thermallytreated artificiallyinoculated 
PIF the VBNC cells were not able to be resuscitated when following the manufacturer’s recommended storage conditions for reconstituted PIF. However extended incubation periods  at  of the reconstituted PIF mimicking the length of gastric and complete digestion time of PIF for newborns at the human body temperature were sufficient to resuscitate the VBNC cells. Altogether this suggests that the presence of VBNC C. sakazakii cells in PIF can be a public health concern as under the right conditions VBNC cells could resuscitate once the PIF is reconstituted and consumed by newborns.  
There appears to be a discrepancy in the recommended preparation of PIF i.e. the temperature of water for rehydration between the manufacturer of PIF used in this study  and public health agencies. This study showed that rehydration of PIF with  water can eliminate C. sakazakii in PIF that may be contaminated with the pathogen as reported by the government agencies. Furthermore this study has also shown that it is possible for C. sakazakii to survive and grow in the stomach of newborns. Since it is not possible to produce sterile PIF it should be made clear on the labels of all PIF products sold globally that  water not room temperature water should be used to prepare PIF to eliminate the potential presence of C. sakazakii and/or other Cronobacter spp. Taken together this study has highlighted the need for i) further research into the stress response and virulence mechanisms of C. sakazakii in newborns and/or older infants ii) a global consensus on the safe preparation of PIF that should  be routinely implemented by all PIF manufacturers and iii) the development of novel technologies to inactivate all foodborne pathogens in PIF to reduce the risk of neonatal infections. Furthermore in addition to the culturebased quality control method it may be beneficial for PIF manufacturing facilities to implement on some type of routine schedule the use of fast and reliable viability methods to confirm the absence of VBNC cells in the final products.  

