There is a disagreement on the UVC fluence required for microbial inactivation due to various understanding of UVC fluence and its measurement methods. This study determined the UVC fluences required for dairyassociated Listeria monocytogenes strains inactivation using a collimated beam device. In PBS a UVC fluence of  mJ/cm was sufficient to inactivate  logs of L. monocytogenes. Milk fat and protein concentration fat globule and casein micelle particle sizes strongly correlated with observed UVC absorption and scattering of the milk. These optical properties significantly affected the inactivation of L. monocytogenes. Taking into consideration the UVC absorption and reduced scattering coefficients of milk in the UVC fluence calculation inactivation similar to that observed in PBS at various UVC doses could be achieved in goat and cow milk at various fat levels. This study demonstrated that the inclusion of the milk optical properties is critical for accurate UVC fluence calculations. 
 	 
CHAPTER . GENERAL INTRODUCTION 
Raw milk contains harmful microorganisms originating from contaminated udder or milking equipment. Foodborne listeriosis cases caused by Listeria monocytogenes are often associated with the consumption of unpasteurized or pasteurized dairy products such as milk cheese and butter . L. monocytogenes can grow in a wide range of pH and temperature which enable it to grow in raw milk and processed dairy products at refrigerated temperatures or even in poor quality silage at pH . . Some strains of L. monocytogenes are thermal resistant and survive inadequate thermal processing thus leading to recontamination of the processed dairy products . Due to its abundant nutrient content milk spoilage may occur during storage. 
More than  serotypes of L. monocytogenes have been categorized . Serotypes  and /c are the major types frequently isolated from food products and the food production environment . However serotypes  and b are the leading cause of infections in humans and the most frequent types that cause the vast majority of recorded outbreaks linked to dairy products 
. Thus 
L. monocytogenes serotypes  and b can be considered a “gold standard” for comparing 
foodborne isolates analyzed in different labs or with various techniques . 
Thermal pasteurization is a gold standard in the dairy industry as a proven technology to retain the quality and ensure safety of the milk. Hightemperature heat is applied directly or indirectly to milk for a short time to achieve at least log reduction of the most heatresistant pathogen in milk . However heat from thermal pasteurization can affect the biochemical composition of milk resulting in sensory changes and reduced nutritional content . The heat applied to milk could denature protein degrade flavour and reduce the content of heatsensitive nutrients and bioactive components. The other drawbacks of this technology are high water and energy usage. Thus researchers have explored the use of several nonthermal technologies to inactivate pasteurized milk that could ensure quality. Studies have shown the capability of UVC irradiation to reduce  logs of L. monocytogenes in various types of milk . However it is difficult to compare the results between UV inactivation studies due to various UV fluence calculation methods. The mentioned studies reported a wide range of required UV fluences with different units to inactivate the L. monocytogenes in milk.  
Increased consumer demand for milk with similar taste and nutritional value to fresh milk has motivated dairy industries and researchers worldwide to develop novel nonthermal technologies to pasteurize raw milk. Some of these nonthermal technologies include highpressure processing  pulsed electric field  ultraviolet C irradiation Ultrasonication  membrane filtration nonthermal plasma ohmic heating and electronbeam irradiation. Most research to date on UVC irradiation has shown promising evidence on pathogen inactivation sensory improvement and shelflife extension of milk . Studies also observed a potential improvement in milk quality by incorporating UVC irradiation with thermal treatment using a hurdle approach . 
UVC irradiation technology is receiving increasing recognition and is continuously being developed. However there are challenges to implementing UVC irradiation in the dairy industry. 
Milk thermal pasteurization has established internationally recognized regulations and parameters to ensure the safety of pasteurized milk. In contrast nonthermal technologies still need more supporting data and consensus to establish these types of regulations. More research is needed to understand the effect of instrument design processing parameters microbial characteristics milk composition physicochemical properties and optical properties on the efficacy of UVC irradiation. Based on the researchbased understanding of this technology regulation of UVC irradiation on milk should be established prior to adaptation in the milk industry. 
However studies on the UVC irradiation for microbial inactivation in milk could not be compared due to differences in UV fluence unit and measurement methods. Some studies expressed the UV fluence as an energy per area unit  while others as an energy per volume unit  or as an electrical power per area unit W/m  which supposed to express the light intensity. Besides unit differences various methodologies were used to calculate the UV fluence or dosage . Several studies used a measured UV intensity as a UVC fluence  while other studies use various formulas to calculate UVC fluence .  
This consequence can be seen from an extensive wide range of required UV fluences to inactivate a specific pathogen expressed by studies. Several studies expressed the UV fluences to reduce  log of a single bacterial strain in liquid milk at less than  mJ/cm  while other studies expressed the required UVC fluence in thousands of mJ/cm . Moreover most studies expressed the UVC fluence based on the fluence exposed to the sample using various types of UV equipment. Only a few UV studies on milk have taken the optical properties of the media into account in the UVC fluence calculation .  
This research has been performed to measure the required UVC fluence to achieve incremental log inactivation of L. monocytogenes strains associated with dairy and establish an inactivation kinetic model using a standardized method . This study also investigated the L monocytogenes inactivation by the collimated beam device in pasteurized cow and goat milk products vary in fat level and homogenization treatment which could differ in optical properties to observe the correlation between the absorptionscattering coefficients of milk concerning the efficacy of UVC irradiation on L. monocytogenes inactivation. In addition the nutritional composition and particle size distribution of the milk products used in this research were analyzed to confirm the possible correlation between these parameters and the absorption or reduced scattering coefficients. 
.. Research Hypothesis 
It is hypothesized that accurate required UVC fluences to achieve similar incremental log inactivation of L. monocytogenes in various milk samples can be determined by taking into account the optical properties specifically absorption and reduced scattering coefficients of milk in the UVC fluence calculation. It is also hypothesized that both concentration and particle size of the suspended protein and fat particles are strongly correlated with the UVC absorption and scattering in milk. 
 
.. Research Objectives 
To our knowledge there is a lack of literature on how strong the correlation is between the absorptionscattering coefficient of the milk and the required UVC fluence to inactivate dairyrelated L. monocytogenes strains in milk. There is also no clear evidence on which solid particles in milk specifically contribute to the UVC light absorption and scattering of milk. This study was conducted with objectives to: 
Determine the UVC fluence required for incremental log inactivation of L. monocytogenes strains in high UVC transmission phosphatebuffered saline  treated by a collimated beam device. 
Prove that accurate UVC fluence calculation can be obtained by taking the UVC absorption and reduced scattering coefficient of the milk into account. 
Propose the best mathematical model to represent the incremental log inactivation of dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains in UVCtreated PBS and milk. 
Investigate the effects of the composition and particle size profile of milk on the UVC light absorbance and scattering of various pasteurized milk products.  
  
CHAPTER . LITERATURE REVIEW 
.. UVC Irradiation Technology 
... The microbial inactivation mechanism of UVC irradiation 
Electromagnetic radiation including radio waves microwaves infrared visible light ultraviolet Xrays and gamma rays consists of selfsustaining energy in the form of magnetic and electric fields . UV light is a form of electromagnetic radiation with a spectrum falling between xray and visible light specifically in the short wavelength spectrum from  to  nm. The UV light spectrum is generally classified into four regions: UVA 
 UVB  UVC  and vacuumUV  . Several types of artificial UV sources are available such as continuous lowpressure and mediumpressure mercury lamps pulsedUV xenon arc lamps and xenon excimer lamps and lightemitting diode  . Lowpressure mercury  lamps radiate approximately  of UVC light at . nm and are considered the most effective UVC light for germicidal applications . UVC irradiation with wavelength at  nm has germicidal properties with an optimum at  nm .  
The UVC light inactivates microorganisms when nucleic acids of microorganisms absorb the light resulting in crosslinked pyrimidine dimers formation in the DNA and leading to a dysfunctional cell . The microbial inactivation occurs due to the formation of mutagenic lesions such as cyclobutene pyrimidine dimers  and  photoproducts  induced by the UVC irradiation . 
These types of lesions are cytotoxic and have lethal effects due to interference with the vital cellular functions  such as DNA transcription replication and respiration 
. Formation changes in DNA caused by UVC light depends on the total absorbed energy while low energy absorption might result in reversible changes . Another theory is that the interaction between UV radiation and dissolved organic carbon in water could form hydrogen peroxide  which induces an indirect germicidal effect . 
... UVC irradiation application in the food industry 
Because of its germicidal property a lowpressure mercury lamp with a wavelength of . nm has been widely used for water disinfection such as drinking water wastewater and recreational water . UV light irradiation has also been used for polymeric biomaterials and medical device sterilization . UV light is used to disinfect equipment surfaces and packaging containers in the food industry . UV irradiation can also be integrated with the cleaninginplace  systems of food processing units. UV irradiation prevents microbial contamination inside the processing unit by inactivating microbiological contaminants in CIP rinse or wash water . Integrating UV light with CIP systems can also reduce the amount of chlorine used for water purification . 
UV irradiation has also been used to disinfect surfaces of fruits and vegetables to improve their shelflife. Studies reported the capability of UV light to slow down the decay in grape berries 
 kumquat and orange fruit  peaches  green tomatoes  mango  and papaya . UV light could reduce the bacteria load of fish and shellfish surfaces . In  The United States Food and Drug Administration  approved UV irradiation for fresh juice product processing . In  Health Canada allowed the sale of unfermented or unpasteurized apple cider as long as it has been treated with CiderSure  a thin film UV processor unit . Since then there has been a growing interest to utilize UV technology on other liquid foods. However UV irradiation treatment has not yet been approved for microorganism inactivation in milk.  
.. Listeria monocytogenes 
L. monocytogenes was described in detail for the first time as Bacterium monocytogenes by Murray et al. . The species name of “monocytogenes” was suggested by Murray et al.  because they often found large numbers of monocytes in the peripheral blood of infected monogastric animals. Later the genus name was changed to “Listeria” in  suggested by Pirie 
. L. monocytogenes belong to the family Listeriaceae order Bacillales .  
L. monocytogenes is a Grampositive nonacidfast short rodshaped and nonsporulating bacteria . Although L. monocytogenes could grow in an aerobic condition these bacteria grows best under microaerophilic environment . Consuming food that contains a high number of L. monocytogenes will cause an infection known as listeriosis with the infective dose approximately  to  CFU in healthy person and only  to  CFU in groups at higher risk of infection . Specific groups of people such as elderly infants pregnant women and immunocompromised persons are susceptible to L. monocytogenes infection . Around  of listeriosis cases in humans are foodborne although the infection routes can be varied and complex . In humas listeriosis can cause meningitis septicemia and disturbances of pregnancy that can lead to abortion .  
... Listeria monocytogenes in milk 
L. monocytogenes is one of the intracellular pathogenic bacteria found in milk. 
L. monocytogenes can grow in a wide range of pH  and temperature   which enable it to grow in raw milk and processed dairy products at refrigerated temperatures or even in poor quality silage at pH . . The isolation rates of L. monocytogenes from bulk tank milk are between  and   making it a pathogen of concern to the dairy industry. 
Foodborne listeriosis cases are often associated with the consumption of dairy products such as raw milk cheese and butter made using raw milk . L. monocytogenes in the raw milk can contaminate the dairy food processing facilities which leads to biofilm formation in the food processing environment . Thus the consumer can be directly exposed to L. monocytogenes when they consume not only unpasteurized but also pasteurized dairy products. Some strains of L. monocytogenes are heat resistant and survive inadequate thermal processing thus leading to recontamination of the processed dairy products . 
More than  serotypes of L. monocytogenes have been categorized . Serotypes  and /c are frequently isolated from food products and the food production environments . However serotypes  and b are the main cause of infections in humans  and are the most frequent types that cause the vast majority of recorded outbreaks linked to dairy products . 
Thus L. monocytogenes serotypes  and b can be considered as a “gold standard” for comparing foodborne strain isolates analyzed in different labs or with various techniques .

 
.. Cow and Goat Milk 
... Nutritional composition and physicochemical characteristics 
Milk is considered a natural oilinwater emulsion where the fat globules are emulsified in milk plasma . The milk plasma consists of fine casein micelles particles dispersed in the milk serum which contain such as lactose serum protein lipoprotein particles enzymes vitamins and minerals. Bovine and caprine milk have similar nutritional compositions. The protein and fat content of goat milk is higher than cow milk while the lactose content of cow milk is about .. higher than goat milk . Goat milk has a higher proportion of monosaccharides and oligosaccharides than cow milk .  
The fat composition and physicochemical properties are remarkably different between goat and cow milk which is important to the dairy industry. The fat globules of goat milk are smaller than cow milk with an average size of around . and . ?m respectively . The level of shortchain fatty acid  in goat milk is significantly higher than in cow milk with  and  of SCFA respectively . Smaller fat globules of goat milk with the lack of agglutinin slow down the fat aggregation and provide more homogenous and stable dispersion . Also the specific lauric and capric fatty acid ratio at : can be used to identify adulteration of goat dairy products with cow milk . A unique ‘goaty’ sensory character of goat milk is strongly correlated to its free fatty acid fraction of the SCFA specifically caproic  caprylic  and capric  acid . 
Casein micelles in bovine and caprine milk have a spherical shape with a diameter between 
. to . µm while the casein submicelles are between . and . µm . Although cow milk has lower protein content than goat milk casein in cow milk is slightly higher than goat milk . However the cow milk has less soluble casein than goat milk . Protein in cow milk is dominated by ?Scasein and ?casein while ?casein is the most abundant protein in goat milk . On average the diameter size of the micelles in cow milk is significantly smaller than the micelles in goat milk . 
... Optical properties of milk 
Suspended solids in milk dominated by fat globules and casein micelles  play an important role in determining the optical properties of milk. The colloidal solids in the milk absorb and scatter light at various degrees according to their number size and refractive index . Thus these properties can be used to rapidly identify the milk quality and profile such as nutritional compositions and particle size . Absorption coefficient  and reduced scattering coefficient  are the parameters that are commonly used to determine the chemical composition of milk or the size of the suspended particles .  
 
Figure . Milk viewed at x and x magnification showing casein micelles and fat globules surrounded by milk serum which is whey protein and lactose solution  
The light propagation in a medium can be characterized using the radiative transport theory  into three optical parameters which include the absorption coefficient  the scattering coefficient  and the phase function . The phase function represents the fraction of scattered light from one direction to another direction where the average cosine of this parameter is called the anisotropy coefficient . Instead of using the scattering coefficient the reduced scattering coefficient  is used to describe scattering if the anisotropy coefficient is unknown . By measuring the reflectance and the transmittance of the light using an integrating sphere and taking the refractive index of the milk into account the light scattering and absorption incident caused by the particles can be identified . 
The light scattering in milk which results in the turbid white appearance occurs due to the suspended particles that are larger than the molecular dimensions of the surrounding medium where these particles have different refractive indexes from the refractive index of the surrounding medium . The scattering effect caused by low concentrated particles such as somatic cells or very small molecules such as serum protein is insignificant and can be neglected . Big particles such as fat globules are the main contributor to the visible  and nearinfrared  light scattering in milk while casein micelles scatter less light than fat globules do due to their smaller particle size . However the small size of casein micelles makes them scatter more short wavelength than long wavelength light . The micelles with higher content of colloidal calcium phosphate can significantly increase the scattering incident .  
Molecules in milk absorb light to various degrees depending on the wavelength of light. Milk has a weak incident of visible light absorption mainly contributed by riboflavin in milk serum and ?carotene in milk fat . The ultraviolet absorption in milk is strongly affected by the aromatic rings of tyrosine and tryptophan and double bonds of the milk fat. In contrast strong water vapor absorption bands and other bands such as aliphatic ester bonds and CH of lipids peptide bonds of proteins OH groups of lactose and undissociated COOH groups contribute to the infrared light absorption in milk. 
.. UVC Irradiation of Milk 
... Microbial inactivation by UV irradiation of milk 
Studies show that UVC resistance varied between types species or strains of microorganisms in milk. Among microorganisms in raw bovine milk yeast/mould have the highest resistance against UV irradiation specifically compared to Escherichia coli Staphylococcus aureus coliforms and mesophilic aerobic microorganisms . Studies indicate that specific strains of sporeforming bacilli such as Bacillus cereus Bacillus pumilus Bacillus subtilis and Paenibacillus lautus are more resistant to UV irradiation compared to nonsporeformers bacteria such as E. coli O:H Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Senftenberg Yersinia enterocolitica subsp. enterocolitica S. aureus Campylobacter jejuni Serratia marcescens subsp. marcescens Aeromonas hydrophila and L. monocytogenes . However Bacillus licheniformis strain ATCC  shows a similar to lower UVC resistance to other strains of several nonsporeforming bacteria species . B. cereus NCTC  strains also have lower UVC resistance than nonspore former S. aureus NCTC  and Listeria innocua NCTC  . These studies exhibit that the UV resistance of bacteria in milk might be straindependent and not correlated to the ability to form spores. 
A study on UVtreated breast milk reported no significant difference between the exponential reduction of E. coli K ATCC  Staphylococcus epidermidis ATCC  Enterobacter cloacae ATCC B. cereus ATCC  and S. aureus ATCC  under the same UVC treatment . However UV studies on milk observed that L. monocytogenes or L. innocua had a higher UVC resistance than E. coli O:H . Beauchamp and Lacroix  investigated the effect of the UVC irradiation on the DNA of L. monocytogenes and E. coli where they identified the importance of the nucleic structure on the UVC resistance of the bacteria. L. monocytogenes with a high degree of genome condensation was more resistant to electromagnetic radiation while E. coli with more uniformly distributed nucleoid was more susceptible to the electromagnetic radiation. This study also assumed that the thick peptidoglycan cell wall of L. monocytogenes might provide a protective effect against the UVC irradiation. 
Studies observed that a selection of Gramnegative and Grampositive pathogens differ in their resistance to UVC irradiation  although these studies showed that the Gram stain category does not correlate well with sensitivity to UVC irradiation. Rossitto et al.  observed Dvalues of milkborne pathogens in UVCirradiated . fat pasteurized milk from  to  J/L in order from lowest to highest namely 
A. hydrophila ATCC  Y. enterocolitica ATCC  E. coli O:H ATCC  
S. aureus ATCC  L. monocytogenes ATCC  S. marcescens ATCC  C. jejuni ATCC  and S. Senftenberg ATCC . Using a similar UV apparatus Crook et al.  reported various UVC fluences needed to reduce log cycles of milkborne pathogens in UHT whole milk from  to  J/L with a different order from lowest to highest: Y. enterocolitica ATCC  A. hydrophila ATCC  S. aureus ATCC  E. coli O:H ATCC  S. marcescens ATCC  S. Senftenberg ATCC  and L. monocytogenes ATCC . 
Log reductions of total aerobic count in milk vary between studies and are most likely influenced by the UV apparatus and UV fluence. Studies exhibit aerobic plate count  reduction by less than  log CFU/ml in raw cow milk treated with a UVC fluence of 
. mJ/cm  and with UV intensity of . W/m for  minutes  . On the other hand other studies show around log reduction of APC was achieved in raw bovine milk treated with a thinfilm laminar flow UV reactor at a UVC fluence of . mJ/cm  and with a turbulent flow UV system at UVC fluence of  mJ/cm . However with the same 
UV system and UV fluence Lu et al.  revealed that the inactivation of the indigenous microorganisms is lower than the inoculated pure strains in raw milk. They speculated that the UV resistance of the indigenous microorganisms was due to the activated UV resistance genes of the subpopulation of microorganisms or due to the presence of several strains with higher UVC resistance than the pure strains. 
Only a few studies have reported the UV inactivation of viruses in milk. A group of researchers used bacteriophages MS and TUV which have a linear UVC fluence response to verify the UVC fluence in skim milk . With a collimated beam device and a dean flow spiral UV reactor UVC fluences of  /cm and . mJ/cm were required to inactivate  logs of MS respectively. In contrast TUV required only  mJ/cm and . mJ/cm to achieve log cycles inactivation using the same UV instruments. Another study observed the UV inactivation of Cytomegalovirus  in breast milk using a UVC lightbox apparatus where . mm depth of CMV infected breast milk was treated with various irradiation times and samplelamp distances . This study showed that a UVC fluence of  mJ/cm could prevent the full replication activity of CMV with only less than  of cells with intracellular CMV protein detected. 
... UVC irradiation as a nonthermal processing alternative to thermal pasteurization of milk 
Thermal processing treatments such as hightemperature shorttime  treatments are globally used to pasteurize milk. Thermal pasteurization has become a gold standard in the dairy industry due to its highly regulated and proven technology to retain the milk quality and ensure safety. However thermal pasteurization has some drawbacks such as more food waste and high water and energy usage . The heat applied to milk could denature protein degrade flavour and reduce the content of heatsensitive nutrients and bioactive components . Thus there is significant interest in the development of novel nonthermal technologies  including UVC irradiation  to pasteurize milk without loss in quality. 
 	 

 
Looking at the microbiological characteristics of the UVC treated milk UVC irradiation is a potential nonthermal method as an alternative for thermal milk pasteurization. Prior studies showed that UVC irradiation in milk can achieve at least log reduction of Grampositive and Gramnegative pathogens in milk using various UV fluences UV apparatus and milk types as shown in Table . Studies compared UVC light treatment with heat pasteurization treatment in milk with similar results. UVC light treatment is similar or less effective on microorganism inactivation than thermal pasteurization . Thermal pasteurization at  °C for  min of raw milk achieved log reduction of aerobic mesophilic bacteria and yeasts/moulds while UVC treatment at UV fluence . J/mL achieved two and one log reduction of aerobic mesophilic bacteria and yeasts/moulds respectively . Heat treatment of colostrum  and increasebacterialcontaminated milk from mastitic cows  show a higher reduction of total bacterial counts compared to both samples treated with UVC treatment at  J/cm . However Cilliers et al.  observed a similar reduction of aerobic microorganism count between pasteurization  and UVC treatment  on full cream raw milk. 
A combination of heat treatment and UVC irradiation improved microbial inactivation without reducing other aspects of milk quality. A UV pretreatment  combined with thermal treatment  of skimmed cow milk achieved 
log inactivation of B. subtilis spores . The UV pretreatment sensitizes Bacillus spores and generates higher inactivation during the thermal treatment. UVC treatment with UV fluence . J/ml could inactivate up to . logs of Geobacillus stearothermophilus spores in milk . This UVC treatment was applied to pasteurized milk resulting in a significant increase of the cold storage shelf life of milk from  days to  days without any adverse effect on the physicochemical properties. 
 Although germicidal UVC radiation can be considered a green technology because it is economical compared to thermal pasteurization and does not leave any residue or introduce toxins  it has a few drawbacks as well. In the food processing line mercury lamp usage should be followed with precautions to avoid mercury contamination due to lamp breakage. Furthermore suspended and dissolved solids in treatment solutions interfere with the UVC light transmission and shorten its penetration depth which reduces the germicidal effectiveness of UVC . Therefore a good understanding of the behaviour of UVC light in liquids with high optical absorbance and its effect on the germicidal properties is required. 
UV light spectrum can oxidize protein and fat in milk causing offflavours . Engin and Yuceer  reported that UVC irradiation generates some volatiles in the milk; however the triangle test result indicated a similar flavour between pasteurized milk and UVCtreated milk. Cappozzo et al.  reported that continuous UV irradiation at  and  J/L does not significantly change the volatile components fatty acid and protein profiles of raw milk. More research is needed to develop optimal UVC irradiation for milk pasteurization with optimal germicidal efficacy but minimal impact on the sensory profile. 
 
 
... Inactivation kinetics of L. monocytogenes by UVC irradiation in milk and other liquid foods 
Studies have shown the capability of UVC irradiation to reduce L. monocytogenes by  logs in various types of milk with various inactivation kinetics . The UVC irradiation using a collimated beam device on L. monocytogenes ATCC  in pasteurized skim milk shows that the Loglinear model best describes the correlation between the inactivation rate of the strain and the given UV fluence . Moreover a study of breast milk treated with a UVC lampequipped fabricated box demonstrated that the UVC fluenceresponse behaviour of combined L. monocytogenes strains  exhibited a biphasic inactivation curve followed by a slight slope of tailing phase .  
Matak et al.  showed that the UVC fluence and the reduction of L. monocytogenes strain FSL X as a result of the UV irradiation using a thinfilm UV system  of fresh goat milk has a nonlinear relationship marked by a plateau at the commencement and a lag phase at the end of the highest UVC fluence exposure. A study with a similar UV system  observed that mixed Weibull best described the inactivation of L. monocytogenes ATCC  compared to other models such as Loglinear  biphasic  and Weibull . Another study by Alberini et al.  which uses a similar thinfilm UVC device 
“SurePure Turbulator™’’ indicated that the inactivation of the same L. monocytogenes strain in 
UHT milk by UVC irradiation has a coefficient of determination  of . and . for the fitting by first order and Double Weibull models respectively. This poor fit is due to the existence of a double concavity pattern. 
Gouma et al.  observed that the inactivation of L. monocytogenes STCC  in apple juice with a combined treatment of UVC irradiation and mild heat has a shoulder phase in a lower temperature which begins to disappear as the temperature increases to . °C. Its survival curve best fits the nonloglinear model by Geeraerd et al. . On the other hand the inactivation of L. innocua ATCC  in apple juice treated with a continuousflow UV device has a firstorder inactivation kinetic with a correlation coefficient of . . Other studies have reported that L. monocytogenes in coconut water followed loglinear inactivation kinetics with the coefficient of correlations higher than . although the strains and the UV irradiation methods were different between studies . Different reported inactivation kinetics models of the UV irradiated L. monocytogenes are most likely due to several factors such as the properties of the liquid medium and UV irradiation equipment. These factors are even more crucial for the UV irradiation in opaque liquids including milk due to the UV light attenuation by the suspended particles .  
.. Factors Influencing the Efficacy of UVC Irradiation 
... The effect of milk composition and physicochemical properties on the efficacy of 
UVC irradiation 
UVC inactivation of microorganisms suspended in clear liquid has significantly higher efficacy than in liquid with high opacity . Researchers tried to identify the key factors affecting UVC germicidal efficacy in an opaque liquid such as milk. Milk has a high opacity due to the content of suspended colloidal particles of casein micelles and fat globules and certain minerals . A study on colostrum which has higher fat and protein content than regular whole milk showed that UV inactivation at  J/cm for . minutes has lower log reduction  of several strains of S. Typhimurium E. coli Acinetobacter baumanni S. aureus Streptococcus agalactiae and L. innocua than regular whole milk  . Another study observed a positive correlation between the total solids in breast milk and the UVC fluence needed to achieve equal log reduction . These studies indicate that the total solids of the milk inversely influence the efficacy of UVC irradiation. 
Using a coiled tube UV reactor at . mJ/cm with various combinations of flow rate and tube inner diameter the UV inactivation of E. coli W in skimmed cow milk achieved higher log reductions  than in the higher fat content raw cow milk  . This study observed a similar pattern of the inactivation rate of B. cereus endospores of strain ATCC Preceptrol in raw milk  and skimmed milk  but with a more subtle difference. However the UV reactor design may also modulate the effect of the fat on the UV irradiation efficacy. A study using a thin film UV reactor with a flow guiding element showed no difference in the inactivation of E. coli DH? in . fat and . fat UHT milk . 
Among skim cow milk  whole cow milk  and sheep milk  Ansari et al.  reported that the highest B. subtilis ATCC  spore inactivation using a coiled tube UV reactor was achieved in skim cow milk while the lowest inactivation was in sheep milk . This study indicated that the UV inactivation is positively correlated with the Reynolds number of the milk influenced by the density viscosity fat and total solids concentration. However Müller et al.  observed that with sufficient dean vortices in a dean flow UV reactor there was no correlation between the Lactobacillus plantarum BFE  inactivation rate and the fluid viscosity and density. Studies in milk and other liquid types also confirmed no correlation between pH and microbial inactivation efficacy by UVC irradiation . Prior studies on various types of juice also reported that the efficacy of UVC inactivation was not affected by the turbidity of the liquid . 
... The effect of milk optical properties on the efficacy of UVC irradiation 
Studies stated an inverse relationship between the UVC inactivation rate and absorption coefficient  of milk which is influenced by the suspended particles in the milk . The absorption coefficient is an optical measure used to express the light absorption rate in a food matrix . Choudhary et al.  reported that the reduction of E. coli W and B. cereus ATCC Preceptrol strains was lower in whole raw milk with an absorbance coefficient at  /cm than in skimmed milk at  /cm. Ansari et al.  reported the log reduction of B. subtilis by UVC treatment  and thermal treatment  in skim milk  whole cow milk  and sheep milk  at . . and . log CFU/ml respectively. These studies suggested that dissolved and suspended solids in milk absorb the UVC light reducing the UVC light penetration in milk and resulting in a lower microbial inactivation rate of UVC irradiation.  
The absorption coefficient of the liquid affects the UV inactivation rate directly in which a higher absorption coefficient results in lower microbial inactivation by UV irradiation . Using an annular UV reactor at the same fluence the inactivation of E. coli K ATCC  inoculated in clear buffer . caramel solution apple juice . caramel solution apple cider and . caramel solution with absorption coefficient at . . . .  and . /mm could reach . . . . . and . log reduction respectively .  
Using a dean flow reactor at . kJ/L Müller et al.  reported a log reduction of 
L. plantarum BFE  was achieved in cloudy apple juice with the lowest optical density  of  and absorption coefficient of . /cm followed by a .log reduction in blood orange juice with optical density  of . and absorption coefficient of . /cm and less than .log reduction in elderberry nectar with optical density  of  and absorption coefficient of . /cm. Using thinfilm flowthrough reactors Gayán et al.  showed an inverse linear relationship between the log reduction of L. monocytogenes STCC  and absorption coefficient of the medium. Akgün and Ünlütürk  also observed a higher inactivation rate of E. coli K ATCC  in pasteurized clear apple juice at . logs compared to fresh cloudy apple juice at . logs when treated with UVLEDs unit with UV fluence at . mJ/cm.  
... The effect of UV system design on the efficacy of UVC irradiation 
The UVC light wavelength at  nm was proven to carry out higher inactivation of E. coli O:H in pasteurized whole bovine milk than the lower or higher UVC wavelengths . Most studies on the microbial inactivation efficacy of UVC irradiation on milk were using the conventional LPM lamp. However one study observed that a lowpressure electrodeless 
UV lamp has higher incident intensity than an LPM UV lamp at the same wavelength . Treating sterilized whole cream milk with the same UV apparatus and dosage Lu et al.  observed that pathogenic strains were reduced by more than  logs when using an electrodeless lamp. In comparison most strains were only reduced between  logs when using a mercury lamp. Further study on UV inactivation on milk using an LED lamp or an electrodeless lamp is needed to develop a more energyefficient UV system for possible food industry 
applications.  
One of the labscale UV instruments used in research is the continuousflowthrough coiled tube UV reactor where the tube is coiling around the LPM lamp which emits UV light at . nm . This UV reactor makes use of the coiled tube to generate a dean flow which creates a mixing movement inside the tube due to the centripetal forces caused by the bent tube . The dean flow brings the liquid to the surface evenly and provides homogenous UV exposure . The depth of the UV light penetration is very shallow due to the high opacity of milk. Thus bringing the milk to the surface of the tube while passing through the coiled tube will improve the treatment efficacy . 
An additional .log reduction of L. plantarum in blood orange juice was achieved by increasing the flow rate of the UV dean flow reactor and causing the dean number to increase from roughly  to  . In line with this study Choudhary et al.  showed that increasing flow rate result in a higher Reynolds number can improve the efficacy of the UVC inactivation on specific strains of E. coli and B. cereus in milk. Not only the flow rate but studies also observed a higher UVC inactivation of E. coli in milk when the inner diameter of the tube was reduced by half .  
Even with lower flow rates the UVC irradiation with a smaller tube inner diameter still results in higher E. coli inactivation . This study demonstrated  logs of E. coli reduction using a . mm tube at a flow rate of . L/h while only .log reduction was achieved using a . mm tube at a flow rate of . L/h. The highest flow rates combined with the smallest inner diameter tube which results in the highest Reynolds number indicating the highest E. coli inactivation in milk treated with the coiled tube UV apparatus . 
.. Concluding Perspective 
Nonthermal technologies including UVC irradiation have been extensively studied for food processing including milk pasteurization. Reported findings provide scientific evidence of the prospective benefits of UVC irradiation in inactivating pathogens in milk. However there are many factors affecting the UVC propagation in milk that is known and unknown affecting UVC treatment efficacy. As summarized in this review some known factors are the UVC system design chemical composition and optical properties of milk. However there is no agreed or standardized method to incorporate these factors in the UVC fluence calculation. Moreover there might be unknown factors that are yet discovered. These gaps become a challenge for this technology to be utilized for commercial applications. Thus future research is required to gain a more comprehensive understanding of these crucial factors and incorporate them in the UVC fluence calculation method which can measure the efficacy accurately and accommodate numbers of UVC equipment and types of liquid food. 
CHAPTER . DETERMINATION OF THE UVC INACTIVATION KINETICS MODEL AND REQUIRED FLUENCES FOR INCREMENTAL LOG INACTIVATION OF SEVERAL DAIRYASSOCIATED LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENES STRAINS IN PHOSPHATEBUFFERED SALINE 
.. Abstract 
Researchers has been disagreed about the required UVC fluence for microbial inactivation due to various interpretation of UVC fluence and its measurement methods. The objective of this study was to model the UVC inactivation kinetics and determine the fluences required for the incremental log inactivation of ten dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains suspended in phosphatebuffered saline . Ten L. monocytogenes dairy isolates belonging to serotype /a 
/b and b were individually inoculated in PBS and treated in triplicates with UVC fluences of      and  mJ/cm using a collimated beam device emitting UVC at  nm. Exposure time for each UV fluence was calculated using International Ultraviolet Association published methods. All experiments were performed in triplicate. 
The log reduction from each treatment was identified using the plate count method and plotted against UVC fluence. Linear and nonlinear regression curve fitting using GInaFiT version . were attempted. The UVC fluences required for incremental log inactivation for each isolate were determined based on the bestfit model. The survival behaviours of all strains were best fitted to the Weibull+tail model with correlation coefficients between .. was proposed to describe the incremental log inactivation of all strains. The required UVC fluence to inactivate log cycle  of L. monocytogenes isolates in buffer were between . and . mJ/cm. A complete understanding of the UVC fluence response of L. monocytogenes in PBS using collimated beam can help improve the determination of UVC fluences required to inactivate L. monocytogenes in opaque liquid such as milk. 
.. Introduction 
Unpasteurized dairy products including milk cheese and butter may contain L. monocytogenes causing Foodborne listeriosis cases . L. monocytogenes is capable of growing in raw milk or in refrigerated pasteurized milk due to its ability to grow in a wide range of temperature and its specific strains that can survive inadequate heat treatment leading to recontamination of the processed milk . L. monocytogenes serotypes  and b are reported to be the leading cause of bacterial infections in humans which are also the most frequent types that accounted for the vast major outbreaks related to dairy products . Thus comparing L. monocytogenes strains with serotypes  and b with various lab techniques or locations can be considered a “gold standard” . 
Thermal pasteurization has some drawbacks despite of being a gold standard in the dairy industry and proven to be able to retain milk quality and ensure safety to the consumers. Thermal processing use relatively higher volume water and energy than nonthermal processing . The applied heat could denature milk protein change the sensory properties and degrade the concentration level of heatsensitive nutrients and bioactive components . 
Thus researchers have explored the use of several nonthermal technologies to inactivate pasteurize milk that could ensure quality . Studies have shown the capability of UVC irradiation to reduce  logs of L. monocytogenes in various types of milk . However it is difficult to compare the results between UV inactivation studies due to various UV fluence calculation methods . The mentioned studies reported a wide range of required UV fluences with different units to inactivate the L. monocytogenes in milk .  
It is critical to have an adequate understanding on the factors affecting the impact of UV irradiation on microorganism in milk. The effect of UV irradiation on microorganism is strongly affected by the type of species and strain growth phase cell wall structure and initial count all of which in turn influence the UV sensitivity and its DNA reparability . Other environmental and processing factors such as poor UV fluence distribution higher treatment temperature presence of visible light and sublethal stress prior to UV treatment could help the microorganism increase its UV resistance . However the inactivation efficacy of UV in milk also depends on the optical properties of milk due to the poor penetration capability of UV light . Thus investigating the UVC fluence response in a clear liquid is crucial to avoid any involvement of suspended particles that might interfere with the UV fluence deliverance to the microorganism. 
A UVC with a Lowpressure mercury  lamp benchscale collimated beam device was used in this study . The IUVApublished protocol was used to determine the fluence. Four correction factors considered in the methods are the petri reflection divergence and water factors . The petri factor is used to correct the UV irradiance reading at the center by considering the UV irradiance incident varies over the water surface area. Considering that a small part of the beam is reflected off from the water surface due to refractive index changes from air to water the reflection factor is calculated. The absorbed beam by the water was taken into account in the UVC fluence determination by taking the water factor into account. The divergence factor is included in the UVC calculation considering that the UV beam is not perfectly collimated because the distance between the lamp and the water surface is more than about four times the aperture diameter between distances from the lamp causing the divergence of the beam. This study was conducted to determine the UVC fluence required for incremental log inactivation of several dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains in PBS treated by a collimated beam device and to propose their kinetic models of inactivation. 
.. Materials and Methods 
... L. monocytogenes strains selection and culture growth 
A total of  L. monocytogenes strains of serotype  and b isolated from milk dairy manure and cheese were obtained from Health Canada and Laboratory Services of University of Guelph . All primary stock cultures were cryopreserved at  °C. 
 
 
For the UVC irradiation experiment working stock cultures of all strains were prepared by streaking a loopful of the primary stock on TSA and incubating overnight at  ?C. A single isolated colony from the plate was inoculated to  ml TSB and incubated overnight at  ?C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at  xg for  min and washed with  ml of PBS 
. The pellet was resuspended in PBS to make a cell suspension with A  lower than . cm. 
... Media preparation 
PBS . M at pH . was used as a media for L. monocytogenes inoculation. CM buffer  at pH . was used for bacteriophage inoculation in biodosimetry. The absorption spectrum of PBS and CMB at wavelengths from  to  nm were measured as described in  using a Cary  UVVis Spectrophotometer from Agilent Technologies . 
... Collimated beam UV device 
A benchscale collimated beam UV apparatus  housing an LPM lamp emitting monochromatic light at . nm was used to perform the UV irradiation. The lamp was switched on at least  min prior to use to stabilize lamp output. Set up of the benchscale apparatus calibration of UVC irradiance and determination of UV fluence were performed as detailed by Bolton and Linden  and Bolton et al. . 
 
Figure . The schematic diagram of collimated beam device for  irradiance measurement and  microbiological experiment 
 
... UVC fluence rate  calculation 
To calculate the germicidal fluence rate  exposed to the surface of the treatment solution the UV irradiance at the center of the treated surface  was measured using a radiometer  positioned at the same height as the liquid surface . The average germicidal fluence rate E’avg  also known as the UVC fluence was calculated using Equation . The calculation was taking into consideration several correction factors to closely represent the actual delivered UV fluence to the microorganism suspension . These factors are petri factor reflection factor water factor and divergence factor  
????????? = ???? × ?????????? ???????????? × ???????????????????? ???????????? × ?????????? ???????????? ×
???????????????????? ????????????  
The factors were calculated as below: 
Petri factor: The incident UV irradiance at every  mm in all directions  from the center of the treatment surface area measured using a radiometer. Then the ratio of incident irradiance of each spot over the surface area to the center irradiance was calculated. The petri factor can be defined as the average ratio of incident irradiance over the water surface area to the irradiance at the center of the glass beaker. A proper collimated beam device should have a petri factor higher than . . 
 
Figure . Illustration of petri factor measurement 
Reflection factor: Using Fresnel law to calculate the reflected fraction between air and water  The reflection factor used in this study was R = . . 
Water factor: The ?? = water absorbance with  cm path length at wavelength  nm  and the ?? = height of the water inside the beaker glass  were measured. Considering the sample is entirely mixed the water factor can be derived from integrating the Beer–Lambert 
Law over the sample depth . The water factor was calculated as 
????????a??
?????????? ???????????? =                    a?? ln
The height of the treatment solution inside a glass beaker housing a stir bar  was 
manually measured using a ruler. The height of the water used for the average fluence rate  calculation for the experiment in this study was . cm. The water absorbance was measured using the UVVisible Spectrophotometer . 
Divergence factor: The height of the water inside the beaker glass or commonly expressed as the water depth  and the distance from the lamp to the water surface  were measured. 
For a water path depth less than  cm the divergence factor can be defined as 
??
	???????????????????? ???????????? =  	 	 	  

The distance between the lamp and the surface of the liquid in the experiment was  cm. 
... UV irradiation on L. monocytogenes strains and exposure time calculation 
Cell suspensions of L. monocytogenes prepared as described in section .. was used for irradiation experiments. The measured A was used to calculate the water factor. The exposure time for each UVC fluence  was calculated using Equation .  
?????? ??????????????
	???????????????? ???????? =   	 	 	        
?????????
The E’avg and exposure time calculation for different UVC fluence were repeated for each irradiance experiment.  
A  ml cell suspension of L. monocytogenes in a  ml beaker containing a stir bar  was stirred with a magnetic stirrer to ensure uniform mixing and delivery of UVC photons. The beaker was placed at the center under the collimating tube  for the predetermined exposure times in order to achieve a UVC fluence of     and  mJ/cm. All experiments were performed in triplicates for each strain. UVC fluences delivered by the collimated beam apparatus was verified using biodosimetry assays performed using bacteriophage MS and T and were conducted as described in GunterWard et al.  . 
... Microbiological analysis 
Immediately after UVC treatments the irradiated sample were serially diluted in PBS and appropriate dilutions were spread plated on TSA in duplicate. The plates were incubated in the dark for  hours at  ?C and surviving L. monocytogenes colonies on the plates were counted and presented as mean log CFU/ml and the log reduction for each UV fluence was calculated using 
Equation .  
??
	?????? ?????????????????? = ??????  	 	 	        
??
... Microbial inactivation kinetics and lethality calculations 
Survival plots of L. monocytogenes were generated by plotting surviving L. monocytogenes populations  following UV treatment against UVC fluences and inactivation kinetics analyzed by performing curve fitting using a freeware Microsoft Excel addin called GInaFiT version . . A linear and eight nonlinear inactivation models available in this tool were fitted to the survival plot of each strain . The bestfit model had the highest adjusted Rsquared and the lowest rootmeansquare error . The UVC fluences required to achieve incremental log reduction for each strain was calculated by using the equation of the selected inactivation model. 
 
 
... Statistical analysis 
All results were analyzed using oneway analysis of variance  to determine the statistical significance at P < . followed by a Tukey Honest significance test at confidence level . The normality of the data distribution and equal variation was confirmed for all data. All model assumptions were verified by the ShapiroWilk normality test quantilequantile plot and residual plots to measure the normality of the data distribution. All statistical tests were conducted using R . 
.. Results and Discussion 
... The UVC inactivation of L. monocytogenes strains in PBS 
Table  reflects the log reduction of L. monocytogenes serotypes  and b following exposure to  mJ/cm of UVC fluence at  nm. Overall the log reductions after being exposed by     and  mJ/cm of UVC fluence were between ..  .   log cycles respectively. The data indicates that the UVC inactivation of all strains as fluencedependent. However the log reductions of L. monocytogenes between serotypes were not statistically different . Studies indicate similar evidence where a higher L. monocytogenes inactivation was achieved at higher UVC fluence whether in clear PBS  or cloudy citratephosphate buffer  
 
 
As shown in Table  the log reductions between strains after exposure to  to  mJ/cm of UVC fluence were not significantly  different between strains. Lower than a log reduction was achieved at UVC fluence of  mJ/cm on all strains. At UVC fluence of  mJ/cm the lowest inactivation was observed in strain HPB at . ± . log CFU/mL statistically lower than the highest inactivation achieved in strain HPB at . ± . log CFU/mL. However the inactivation of these strains was not significantly different from the rest of the strains. The UVC fluence of  mJ/cm could inactivate at least log cycles of dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains belonging to the serotypes  and b used in this experiment. 
 

 
A study using a similar UV fluence calculation method observed inactivation greater than  but less than log cycles of L. monocytogenes ATCC  in buffered water at UVC fluence of  mJ/cm . A study by Collins  the only study on L. monocytogenes in the compilation list of required UVC fluences to achieve incremental log inactivation of microorganisms by Malayeri et al.  shows that UV fluence at . mJ/cm could inactivate  logs of a mouserelated L. monocytogenes strain on the agar plates. Moreover this study is lacked detail on the UV fluence determination protocol.  
McKinney et al.  indicate that a UV fluence of . mJ/cm determined using chemical actinometry could inactivate  logs of meat productrelated L. monocytogenes  in distilled water while lower fluence at . mJ/cm could achieve the same inactivation in a fresh brine . Another study observed around log reduction of L. monocytogenes  in PBS after treated with  mJ/cm of UVC fluence . The UVC fluence was calculated without considering any correction factor affecting the UVC attenuation in the sample. These studies have different UVC irradiation equipment and setup compared to our experiment. Thus the UVC fluence obtained in our study could not be compared to these mentioned studies due to the different applied UVC fluence calculation and used UV apparatus.  
... UVC inactivation kinetics modeling of L. monocytogenes strains in PBS 
The freeware tool GInaFiT version . was used to assess the UVC fluencedependent inactivation of each strain. The linear and nonlinear survivor models available in the GInaFiT were fitted to the survival plots and the bestfit inactivation model for L. monocytogenes strains used in this study was determined. Among these mathematical models a model with the lowest rootmeansquare error  and the highest adjusted R was chosen as the bestfit model to express the UVC inactivation of the strains. The survival plot of all L. monocytogenes strains fitted to the loglinear and nonloglinear models were illustrated in Figure CC of Appendix C.  
It is unlikely to fit the loglinear+tail model to most of the L. monocytogenes strains inactivation data due to the lower Log than the value from the experiment. To be considered as a biphasic model the inactivation should have two distinct inactivation rate constants. The biphasic model was unlikely for most of the obtained inactivation results because the parameter estimate of two inactivation rate constants  was equal. Thus this study only focuses on the feasible models such as loglinear loglinear+shoulder Weibull Weibull+tail and double Weibull models. The comparison of these models fitted to the survival plot of the L. monocytogenes strains  was illustrated in Figure . 

Comparing the statistical measures of all models  the loglinear model fitted the least to L. monocytogenes survival plots with adjusted R between  to  suggesting that the survival behaviours of the strains were not linear. Curve fitting using loglinear+shoulder model improved adjusted R  and RMSE  for all strains. Gayán et al.  also reported that the UV inactivation of L. monocytogenes strains has a good fit with the loglinear+shoulder model with RMSE between . to . similar to our study. However Weibull model provides a better fit with higher adjusted R at . to ..  
The highest adjusted R were obtained in survival plots curve fitted using Weibull+tail and double Weibull models. Survival plots of seven of the ten strains  had the best curve fit with the double Weibull model with adjusted R at  to . However the double Weibull model provides a poor fit for strain HPB HPB and HPB with adjusted R about   and  respectively. The Weibull+tail model provides better quality of fit to those strains. The Weibull+tail model is the best model explaining the UVC inactivation of all strains in PBS with the highest adjusted R between . to . and lowest RMSE between . to .. Thus the Weibull+tail model was used to determine the UVC fluences required for incremental log inactivation of the L. monocytogenes strains suspended in PBS.  
 
 
 
 
Four mathematical models have commonly been used to evaluate the microorganism inactivation kinetics in liquid foods by UVC light: loglinear curve curve with shoulder curve with tail and sigmoidal curve . Mafart et al.  proposed the Weibull model as a flexible model to express the nonloglinear downward or upward concavity curves in microbial inactivation kinetics. Thereafter the Weibull model Weibull+tail model was proposed by Albert and Mafart  by modifying to predict a more precise bacterial survival sigmoidal curve with the possibility of shoulder and tail phenomena occurrence. Coroller et al.  later proposed another modified Weibull model called the Double Weibull model to provide a better fit for the inactivation with the presence of two subpopulations where the minority has a higher stress resistance than the majority group. The sigmoidal pattern which begins with an initial shoulder followed by linear and tailing phase was identified as the typical inactivation pattern of UV inactivation observed in juices and ciders .  
Figure  presents L. monocytogenes survival plots fitted with the Weibull+tail model which depicts the L. monocytogenes inactivation at lower UVC fluences with a concave downward sweep with a pronounced tail at higher UVC fluences of  and  mJ/cm. The Weibull slope reflects a nonloglinear behaviour of the L. monocytogenes in response to the UVC irradiation . The initial lag phase indicates that the inactivation begins with an injury phase where the bacteria could still repair the DNA damaged through photo repair mechanism . The tailing phase of most strains begins after UVC fluence at  mJ/cm. 
As many as seven out of ten strains have a high goodnessoffit to the double Weibull model which indicates that the tailing effect observed in the inactivation might be due to the minor subpopulation with greater resistance to the UVC irradiation than the major population . However similar tailing phases have also been observed due to the existence of cellular aggregates uneven UV fluence distribution in the media or microorganism attachment to the surface of the beaker generated as a result of poor mixing of treatment solution . Although the mixing speeds were optimized to avoid the generation of turbulence and cavitation effects to guarantee uniform UVC fluence distribution the mixing pattern might affect the distribution of the UVC fluence in the liquid causing the tailing development. The tailing phase might also occur due to overfitting since the nontailing models such as the loglinear+shoulder and Weibull model have adjusted R at or greater than . Another consideration the tailing phase occurred after a log inactivation was reached which is close to the detection limit at  to  logs. Thus there is also a possibility that the tailing effect occurred due to the initial count. The cause of the occurrence of the tailing phase in this study is unknown.  
Studies with a similar experiment method by GunterWard et al.  and Bhullar et al.  show a good fit of the loglinear model on the inactivation kinetic model for L. monocytogenes ATCC  UVC inactivation. However the presented graphs clearly show a better fit with the nonloglinear than the loglinear model . Studies indicate a good fit of the loglinear model to the UV inactivation of L. monocytogenes in various liquid food such as apple juice coconut water animal milk and human milk using various UV apparatus 
. However other studies show that the Weibull model has a better fit than the loglinear model for L. monocytogenes UVC inactivation in apple juice coconut water and whole milk .   
... UVC fluences required to achieve incremental log inactivation of L. monocytogenes 
The required UVC fluences to achieve incremental log inactivation of each strain based on the obtained Weibull+tail equation was presented in Table  showing a straintostrain variability in UVC fluences. UVC fluences between . to . . to . . to . . to . and . to . mJ/cm were required to reduce     and  logs of L. monocytogenes strains studied respectively. The log cycles inactivation can be achieved after irradiating with UVC fluence higher than . to less than  mJ/cm for all strains except HPB. 
Studies with a similar experiment method by GunterWard et al.  and Bhullar et al. 
 observed a D value of . mJ/cm and . mJ/cm for L. monocytogenes ATCC  
UV inactivation in buffered water and coconut water based on loglinear model. The required UVC fluence for a log inactivation of L. monocytogenes ATCC  in buffered water is slightly lower than our study . However higher UVC fluence at . mJ/cm was required to achieve a log reduction compared to our study. Gayán et al.  observed various required UVC fluences between . to . J/mL to inactivate L. monocytogenes strains  in citratephosphate buffer with absorption coefficient of . /cm. However the UVC fluence was determined by chemical actinometer iodideiodate and using a different measurement unit making it incomparable to our 
results.  
.. Conclusion and Perspectives 
To the best of found knowledge this is the first study demonstrating the UVC fluences required for the incremental log inactivation of several dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains in PBS where the UVC fluence calculation took all correction factors  that affect the UVC penetration by collimated beam device on the microorganisms suspended in a liquid using a collimated beam device. This study provides scientific evidence of the capability of UVC fluence at  mJ/cm to inactivate about log cycles of dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains in PBS. The inactivation kinetics of these L. monocytogenes strains was best characterized using the Weibull+tail model with the coefficient of determination between  to . Using this understanding this study can help future experiments on the L. monocytogenes inactivation in opaque liquid.  
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER . EFFECT OF SUSPENDED MILK SOLIDS ON UVC FLUENCE RESPONSE OF LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENES 
.. Abstract 
Although the use of UV irradiation to pasteurize milk has shown promise the effect of physicochemical and optical properties of opaque liquids such as milk on the efficacy of UV irradiation to inactivate Listeria monocytogenes has yet been characterized. This information is critical to designing appropriate UV irradiation systems for milk pasteurization. The objective of this study was to identify the effect of suspended milk solids on UVC  absorption  and reduced scattering  coefficients and develop an improved method to calculate UV fluence required to inactivate L. monocytogenes in milk. 
The composition and particle size of five commercial milk samples were analyzed using MIR Spectroscopy and Mastersizer  respectively. Milk optical properties were measured using a UVVIS spectrophotometer and used in the ?a and ?'s calculation by the Inverse AddingDoubling program. Correlations between physicochemical and optical parameters were analyzed using ordinary least squares. The UVC fluence rate  and exposure times to achieve UVC fluences of     and  mJ/cm were calculated using multiphysics engineering simulation software utilizing the calculated ?a and ?'s prior to L. monocytogenes irradiation in milk and buffer using a collimated beam device. All experiments were done in triplicates. 
Both ?a and ?'s of the milk were strongly affected by the concentration and the particle size of fat globules and casein micelles in the milk suspension system. Larger suspended particles strongly contributed to the UVC absorption in the milk. The milk protein and fat content strongly impacted the UVC scattering in milk. The E’avg in cow milk  and goat milk  were . . . . and . mW/cm respectively The E’avg calculation method which takes the ?a and ?'s into account could estimate similar UV fluence between milk samples and PBS but requires further improvement to provide an accurate E’avg value for UVC fluence higher than  mJ/cm. The Inclusion of the optical properties of milk is critical for accurate UVC fluence calculations. 
.. Introduction 
Raw milk should be pasteurized prior to consumption to ensure safety for consumers by inactivating the harmful pathogens originating from the contaminated udder or milking equipment . Thermal pasteurization is an established technology widely used to reduce pathogen loads in milk. Hightemperature at least  °C for  seconds for continuous flow pasteurization or  °C for  minutes for batch pasteurization is applied directly or indirectly to milk for a short time to achieve at least log reduction of the most heatresistant pathogen in milk Coxiella burnetti . However these high temperatures can affect the biochemical composition in milk resulting in losses of sensory and nutritional quality .  
Novel nonthermal technologies such as membrane filtration ultraviolet  irradiation highpressure processing  pulsed electric field  and Ultrasonication  have gained attention from dairy industries and researchers worldwide as potential alternatives to milk thermal pasteurization. Recent studies on UVC irradiation have shown promising results including pathogen inactivation a shelflife extension of milk and sensory improvement. . However the results on the efficacy of UVC irradiation for microbial inactivation in milk cannot be compared between studies due to the lack of agreement on the UV fluence unit and measurement methods. Studies expressed UV fluence as an energy per area unit   energy per volume   or as an electrical power per area unit  . Moreover various UV fluence calculation methods were used due to different types of equipment or different definition of UV fluence . Some studies measured UVC fluence as a UV intensity ; others measured UVC fluence as the UV energy received by the microorganisms within the irradiated sample  
The consequence of this is the extensive wide range of reported UV fluences required to inactivate specific pathogens. Several studies have reported UV fluences ranging from as little as . mJ/cm to reduce  logs of tested milk pathogens in whole milk  to as high as  mJ/cm  to achieve a log reduction of E. coli DH? in goat milk. In addition most studies expressed the UVC fluence based on the energy the milk is exposed to rather than the energy received by the target pathogen. Only recently a limited number of studies have taken into consideration the optical properties of milk in the UVC fluence calculation . Despite this there is a significant knowledge gap concerning factors that contribute to the absorption and scattering coefficients of the milk especially the role of dissolved and suspended milk solids in the absorption scattering and penetration of UVC light in milk. Additionally there is no clear understanding of which solid particles contribute to the UVC light absorption and scattering in milk. This study was conducted with objectives to determine ) the effects of the milk composition and particle size profile on the UVC light absorbance and scattering; and ) the appropriate UVC fluences taking into consideration the UVC absorption and scattering effects affected by the milk composition and particle size profiles required for incremental log inactivation of L. monocytogenes in milk samples treated using a collimated beam device. 
.. Materials and Methods 
... Media preparation  
For the UV experiment in clear liquid a sterile . M Phosphatebuffered saline  at pH . was prepared by dissolving PBS powder  in  L of deionized water at room temperature. The sterile PBS was also used for serial dilution. For the UV experiment on milk commercial pasteurized cow milk and goat milk were purchased locally from local grocery stores in Guelph Ontario .  
... Milk composition analysis 
The fat protein lactose and total solids content  of milk were analyzed using midinfrared  Spectroscopy  at the Laboratory Services Division University of Guelph. Each milk sample was analyzed in 
triplicates. 
... Milk particle size distribution analysis 
Particle size distribution of milk samples was examined using a laser diffraction particle size analyzer Mastersizer  with Hydro  SM for the dispersion unit from Malvern Instruments. This analysis was used to estimate the particle size parameters such as volume or massweighted mean diameter  surfaceweighted mean diameter  . D[] reflects the mean diameter of the particles on the basis of particle volume or mass. D[] reflects the mean diameter of the particles on the basis of particle surface area. D[] and D[] were calculated using the Equation  and  where the di is the particle diameter and Ni is the respective particle numbers per unit volume . 
	??[] = ??????  ????????  ????????  	 	 	 	 
	??[] = ????  ??????  ????????  	 	 	 	 
	??	??
Another analyzed particle size parameters were the standard percentiles Dv Dv and Dv based on the maximum particle size for a given sample volume percentage. 
Due to the flexible analysis method found in the application of Analytical Quality by Design   the appropriate SOP or analysis parameters such as refractive index  of the milkfats particle absorption sample temperature type of dispersant obscuration measurement duration and stirrer speed were determined as detailed by Malvern Instruments Ltd  Kippax  and Virden  before analyzing the particle size distribution of milk.  
According to the literature the RI of Cow and goat milkfat of . was used for the particle size distribution analysis on milk . The particle absorption of . was used for milk samples . Before the measurement the sample temperature was conditioned between  ?C to avoid fat crystallization . Deionized water was used as the dispersant of the milk samples to avoid multiple scattering phenomena and excessive obscuration of the laser source . Using protein dissociating additives such as EDTA as a dispersant was avoided to prevent emulsion system disruption in milk. 
Obscuration measures the amount of laser light loss caused by the presence of the sample when introduced into the analyzer beam . Too many particles in the measurement cells will result in multiple scattering and cause an underestimate of the particle size. Thus experiments were done to determine the appropriate obscuration for all milk samples represented by milk samples with the expected smallest and largest suspended particle size and milk samples with the least and the most suspended particles content. Skimmedpasteurized and unhomogenizedpasteurized . milk fat  cow milk samples were used in this experiment. According to Malvern Instruments Ltd  obscuration below  should be used to analyze emulsions containing fine particles at a size less than ?m to prevent multiple scattering in the measurement. Obscuration within the range .. was used in the milk measurement where the particle size of Dv Dv and Dv were stable for both milk samples . The stable percentile values indicated that the multiple scattering did not occur at that obscuration level. 
According to ISO :  about particle size analysis — laser diffraction methods the acceptable measurements of Dv should have results with COV less than  . Measurement duration of s was used where the coefficient of variance  of Dv of . M.F. unhomogenized cow milk and skimmed cow milk were less than . 
A proper stirrer speed was determined to ensure a homogenous dispersion when passing through the measurement cell to obtain representative particle size distribution data . Skimmed pasteurized and unhomogenized pasteurized . M.F cow milk samples were used in this experiment. As shown in figure  the particle size measurement results of both milk samples were stable using stir speed between  to  rpm.

 

 
... Milk refractive index analysis 
The refractive index of milk samples and quartz glass were also measured with a Schmidt 
+ Haensch DSR? multiple wavelength automatic refractometer at a wavelength of  nm and temperature of  ?C. The sample area was rinsed with deionized  water and dried with a lowlint wiper and  ?l of milk sample was placed on the sample area and measured. The refractive index of the milk samples at  nm was determined by data extrapolation using a fifthorder fit. As a standard the refractive index of MilliQ water was measured and compared with values from the literature. All samples were measured in triplicates. 
... Milk absorption and reduced scattering coefficients analysis 
Cary  UVVis Spectrophotometer  with integrated single sphere  box was used to measure unnormalized transmission  and unnormalized reflection  of the UVC light at  nm in the milk samples. Measurements were done using a quart glass slide sandwich fabricated using two quartz glass slides separated using metal spacers measuring . . . or . mm thickness . An adhesive tape  was applied to the corner of the glass plates to prevent leakage when the milk sample was added. The thickness of two quartz glass slides and the thickness of the prepared slide sandwich  was measured using a micrometer screw gauge. The light path length was determined by deducting the thickness of the two quartz glass slides from the prepared slide sandwich thickness . For each sample the T and R measurements were performed twice using two metal spacers with different thickness. The experiment for each sample and each metal spacer was repeated in triplicates.  
              
Figure . Sample preparation for Tdirect and Rdirect measurement 
 
Figure . Light path length determination 
Measurement of T & R was performed following the Inverse AddingDoubling  protocol described by Prahl . Measurement of T of the milk sample was conducted by the sample in front of the sphere box while a reflectance calibration standard  was placed behind the sphere box. Measured total transmittance  was the normalized transmission value by the incoming light using the values of light transmission in the air ) and transmission with blocked incoming light  which can be defined as 
	?????????????  	 	 	 	 
???? ? ?????????????
A prepared sample was placed behind the sphere box to measure the R of the milk sample. Reflections with nothing placed in front of and behind the sphere box ) and with only reflectance calibration standard behind the sphere box  were also measured to calculate measured total reflectance  a normalized reflection value by the incoming light . MR can be defined as 
????? ???? ? ???????????    	 	 	           
The measurement with result of MT lower than  or greater than . were excluded from the data set. The data set only included measurement results for which MT + MR < .  
The MT and MR were then converted into absorption coefficient  and reduced scattering coefficient  by using the IAD program developed by Prahl . The IAD program generated the coefficients after the required parameters as described in Table  were entered into the program. The unit of these coefficients is /mm  then converted to /cm  for further experiment. The MR used in the IAD program is the value of sample reflectance  deducted by the quartz reflectance  . MR quartz was obtained by measuring deionized water reflectance  and deducted by the water reflection at . . 
	 
 
 
 
... L. monocytogenes cocktail preparation and culture growth 
Five strains representing serotypes  and b and various isolation sources were chosen to make a cocktail of L. monocytogenes: H HPB HPB HPB and HPB . The primary stock cultures were cryopreserved at  ?C. The stock culture for each strain was prepared according to the protocol explained in Section ... All individual strain stocks were combined in one centrifuge tube at the same ratio and wellmixed by vortexing. 
The cocktail solution was inoculated in the chilled  milk samples to produce a  to  CFU/ml final concentration. The cocktail solution and the inoculated milk were freshly prepared for each experiment. 
Before UVC treatment each strain was streaked on TSA media and incubated at  °C overnight. A colony from each plate was inoculated in  ml of TSB and incubated at  °C overnight for the UV experiment. All five chosen strains were inoculated incubated centrifuged and washed separately according to the protocol explained in Section ...  
... UVC irradiation in PBS 
The  ml sterile PBS inoculated with L. monocytogenes cocktail was exposed to UVC light using a collimated beam UV device. The experiment was executed following the same methods described in Sections ... ... ... and ... Each experiment was performed in triplicates. 
 
... UVC irradiation in milk 
.... Collimated beam UV apparatus 
The UVC irradiation of the L. monocytogenes cocktail in the milk sample was done using a collimated beam UV device emitting monochromatic UV radiation at . nm from a lowpressure mercury lamp. All inoculated milk samples were kept chilled  and were removed from the refrigerator only prior to irradiation to avoid temperature increase of treatment solution that could stimulate L. monocytogenes growth in samples before UVC treatment. The UV irradiance  exposed to the sample surface was increased by bringing the sample as close as possible to the UV lamp. Hence the irradiation times in the experiment were under  minutes. The distance from the lamp to the treatment surface was maintained at . cm. The samples were processed for enumeration of L. monocytogenes immediately after UVC treatment. .  
A magnetic stir bar  was placed in the beaker. Each sample was stirred during irradiation to ensure homogeneity during irradiation. The amount of inoculated sample was  ml. Care was taken to ensure all beakers used in the milk experiment had a flat bottom. Hence the magnetic stir bar spun in the middle of the beaker to avoid data variation caused by various mixing patterns. 
 
Figure . The schematic diagram of collimated beam device for L. monocytogenes experiment 
in milk 
.... Average fluence rate  calculation 
A computational fluid dynamics  simulation was carried out with the commercial code ANSYS  R to simulate the flow of the liquid in a specified geometry during mixing . FLUENT software was used to draw the geometry  and generate the mesh while Ansys Fluent v.  was used to solve the radiation fields. The mesh resolution was: Nodes: ; Elements: . The technique used the discrete Ordinates  radiation model to solve the radiative transfer equation in the fluid inside a  ml beaker exposed to the UV incident radiation coming from a near collimated beam apparatus . Figure  shows the schematic representation of the geometry of the system adopted for the numerical simulations which presents the schematic drawing of the fluid domain in a collimated beam apparatus including the detailed dimensions used in the simulations. 
 
Figure . UV intensity gradients in skimmed milk 
In the near collimated beam apparatus the local disinfection/inactivation depends on the local fluence and kinetic rate constants. Therefore modelling the collimated beam photoreactor involves two submodels: radiation field intensity and UVreaction kinetics. Microorganisms exposed to UV irradiation were subjected to an exposure dose  that is a function of the irradiance I  multiplied by the exposure time t  as follows: 
	Applied energy  Surface UV fluence  = ?? × ?? 	        
A radiometer  was used to obtain the UVC irradiance at the center of the treated surface inside the beaker . However for a monochromatic lowpressure mercury vapour UV lamp various correction factors must be taken into account for delivered fluence calculation in a suspension . As explained in Section ... the correction factors are the Petri  reflection  divergence  and water  factors. For the experiment in milk the scattering  
		???? ????
factor was added to the calculation . Assuming that the mixing is homogenous and perfect for Newtonian fluids  the above correction factors were sufficient to accurately predict the UVC fluence. The average germicidal UV fluence rate E’avg in each milk sample can be calculated as: 
	??	????????????
	????????? = ???? × ???? ×  × ) × ) × ??   	        
.... Exposure time calculation 
The center irradiance of the UV lamp  was measured and the irradiation E’avg on each milk sample was calculated on each experiment day. The average germicidal fluence   is given by the product of E’avg multiplied by the exposure time t . 
Using the calculated E’avg for each milk sample the required exposure time for a specific desired 
UVC fluence was calculated using Equation .  
?????? ??????????????
	???????????????? ???????? =   	 	 	 
?????????
.... UV irradiation on L. monocytogenes cocktail 
A  ml milk sample inoculated with the L. monocytogenes cocktail at  to  CFU/ml was transferred to a  ml beaker containing a stir bar and mixed on the stir plate . The beaker was placed at the center of the collimating beam and exposed to UVC fluences of    
  and  mJ/cm . Immediately after UV treatments total viable counts of L. monocytogenes were enumerated as described in Section .. and log reductions were calculated. The experiment was done in triplicates for each milk sample. 
... Microbial inactivation model fitting and lethality calculation 
The mathematical models of the cocktail inactivation kinetic in PBS and milk samples were analyzed using a freeware GInaFiT  . A total of nine linear and nonlinear inactivation models available in this tool were tested on the log reduction plot of each media . The model with the highest adjusted Rsquared and the lowest root mean square error  was considered the bestfit model. The required UVC fluence to achieve a specific log reduction in each media was calculated using the selected inactivation model equation. 
... Statistical analysis 
The multiple ordinary least squares regression analysis was executed to evaluate the relationship and importance of the independent variables to the UVC light absorption and scattering coefficient in milk by using the stepwise and best subset regression method. Seven parameters namely protein content fat content D[] D[] total particle number in  ?m³ particle number smaller than . ?m and particle number bigger than  ?m were used as 
independent variables in the modelling. Possible models were evaluated using statistical regression metrics in the ANOVA such as Fisher variation ratio  probability value  correlation coefficient  coefficient of determination  adjusted R predicted R and 
Mallows’ Cp. The standardized regression coefficients were analyzed to compare the relative degree of the effects of the independent variables in the model. 
All results were analyzed using the oneway analysis of variance  to determine the statistical significance at P < . followed by a Tukey Honest Significance test at a confidence level of . The normality of the data distribution and equal variation were verified by the ShapiroWilk normality test quantilequantile plot and residual plots to measure the normality of the data distribution. All statistical tests were conducted using R .  
.. Results and Discussion 
... Milk chemical composition 
The milk composition analysis result confirms that the fat content of all milk samples was according to the claimed value stated on the packaging. CM. contains the highest total solid content at . ± . followed by GM. CM GM and CSM with values of . ± . . ± . . ± . and . ± . respectively . At the same fat level goat milk samples contain less total solids than cow milk samples due to lower protein and lactose in goat milk. The protein content of cow milk was higher than . significantly  higher than goat milk with less than  protein content. This finding contrast with the protein content of raw cow and goat milk produced under similar conditions reported by Ceballos et al.  at around . and . respectively. Cow milk contains significantly higher lactose around . than goat milk at around . This finding agrees with Ceballos et al.  who reported that the raw cow and goat milk contained around . and  of lactose respectively. According to the literature the lactose content of unprocessed cow milk is about .. higher than unprocessed goat milk although goat milk has a higher portion of monosaccharides and oligosaccharides than cow milk . At the same fat level the total solid in goat milk contained a higher fat proportion lower protein proportion and similar lactose proportion compared to cow milk. . 

 
... Milk suspended particle size distribution  
The particle size distribution analysis using the principle of laser diffraction has some advantages such as being fast nondestructive and capable of detecting a broad size range . Assuming that the shape of the particles is a sphere and by fitting the Mie theory assumption to the measurement data  the volumebased particle size distribution of particles ranging in size . ?m and < ?m in the milk samples were obtained . There was no clear separation between the particle size of fat globules and casein micelles in the size distribution data. However the distribution was interpreted based on the reported size of casein micelles between .. ?m and fat globules between . ?m  represented by the first peak and the second peak respectively.

 
 

Figure . Particle size distribution curves of commercial pasteurized cow milk and goat milk measured with particle size analyzer Mastersizer . ? cow milk . M.F. ; ? cow milk . M.F. ; ? cow milk . M.F. ; + goat milk 
. M.F. ;  goat milk . M.F. .
 
 

The particle size distribution result shows two peaks containing particles with approximate particle size smaller than . µm for the first peak and larger than . µm for the second peak. Cow milk has a more apparent separation between the first and second peaks than goat milk. The first peak of cow milk was lower and the second peak was higher as the milk fat level increased. In contrast the first peak in goat milk samples mostly shifted towards the second peak with a higher second peak of GM. than GM..  
The particle size distribution data  is in accordance with the chemical composition . With the highest protein proportion in its total solid among the milk samples studied CSM had the highest first peak followed by the CM CM. GM and GM.. Conversely CSM with the lowest fat proportion in total solids had the lowest second peak followed by CM GM CM. and GM.. At the same fat level goat milk had a lower first peak but higher second peak than cow milk. Not only indicated that goat milk has a higher proportion of fat in the total solids than cow milk but the particle size distribution graphic also indicated that the fat globules of goat milk have a larger size than those of cow milk. 
Parameter D[] and D[] represent the mean diameter size of the population of the particles based on volume and surface areaweighted distribution respectively . D[] is most sensitive to the presence of big particles while D[] is most sensitive to the presence of fine particles in the particle size distribution . The smallest D[] were found in CSM followed by CM CM. GM and CM. with values of . ± . . ± . . ± . . ± . and . ± . ?m respectively . GM. have the highest D[] at . ± . ?m followed by CM. GM CM and CSM at . ± . . ± . . ± . and . ± . ?m respectively.  
All cow milk samples significantly had smaller D[] than all goat milk samples . Considering the characteristic of D[] where the higher the protein content in milk the smaller the D[] reported the smaller diameter of D[] found in cow milk was mainly affected by its higher protein level than those in goat milk. The D[] values indicate that CM. has the highest proportion of big particles among other milk samples. Comparing milk samples with the same fat content indicates that the fat globules of goat milk were larger than those in cow milk. Naturally the fat globules in goat milk are smaller than fat globules in cow milk with the mean diameter around . µm and . µm respectively . However the cow milk used in this study has a smaller fat globules size than the goat milk due to the mechanical homogenization applied to cow milk.  
The volumeweighted particle size distribution can be analyzed by its percentiles Dv 
Dv and Dv  representing the particle size in microns below which   and  of the sample lie respectively . Goat milk . has the highest Dv Dv and Dv among other milk samples at . ± . . ± . and 
. ± . ?m respectively. On the opposite skimmed cow milk has the lowest Dv Dv and Dv with sizes of . ± . . ± . and . ± . ?m respectively. Cow milk has a significantly smaller Dv than goat milk regardless of their milkfat level while the Dv values were not statistically significant . The Dv values depict the protein level in milk where skimmed cow milk has the biggest proportion of fine casein micelle particles followed by GM CM. GM and GM.. On the other hand the Dv values were in line with the fat level in milk where a higher fat content milk samples had higher Dv values than those with lower fat content.  
distribution was converted to the number of particles . Smaller particles in the liquid result in a higher number of particles within the same volume while larger particles will decrease the number of particles. Thus the total particle number is most sensitive to the presence of fine particles. In contrast the percentage of particle numbers with a specific size is more sensitive to the presence of large particles.  
The highest total particle number found in skim milk represents the abundance of fine casein micelle particles in the sample. The total particle numbers found in cow milk are significantly higher than in goat milk regardless of the fat content because  to  of the suspended particles in cow milk are smaller than . ?m . This suggests that the high number of particles found in cow milk was mainly affected by its protein content specifically casein micelles with a particle size smaller than . ?m. On average the diameter size of the micelles in cow milk is significantly smaller than the micelles in goat milk . Casein micelles in bovine and caprine milk have a spherical shape with a diameter between . to . µm while the casein submicelles are between . and . µm respectively .  
Goat milk contained between  to  particles larger than  ?m significantly higher than cow milk which contained less than  . It indicates that goat milk contains more large particulates in number and size than cow milk. Previous reports have shown that the fat globules of goat milk are naturally smaller than cow milk with an average size of around . and . ?m respectively . However the cow milk samples used in this experiment were mechanically homogenized which resulted in smaller fat particles. The goat milk samples were considered to be naturally homogenized due to the smaller fat globules which are predominantly composed of shorter chains of fatty acids than those in cow milk . The shortchain fatty acids  level in goat milk is significantly higher than in cow milk with  and  of SCFA respectively . 
... Milk optical properties 
The optical properties of milk that become the main focus of this research are the properties of UVC light absorption and scattering coefficient in milk. The IAD program used in this study has been extensively used tested and validated for precision and accuracy to calculate the absorbance and scattering coefficient . The scattering anisotropy coefficient  was not measured and defaulted at  in this study. Thus the light scattering incident in the liquid was best represented by the reduced scattering coefficient  rather than the scattering coefficient 
 because the ?? is not known  .  
The UVC absorption and reduced scattering coefficient for all milk samples are presented in Table . The refractive index  of each sample was also measured prior to determining the absorption and scattering coefficient. The refractive indexes of all milk samples were between 
. ± . to . ± .. 
 
 Although the milk fat level did not significantly affect the absorption coefficient among cow or goat milk samples  the UVC absorption coefficients in goat milk were significantly higher than in cow milk . Walstra and Jenness  observed that the ultraviolet absorption in milk is strongly affected by the aromatic rings of the amino acid tyrosine and tryptophan and the double bonds of the milk fat. However our experimental results suggest that milkfat level was not the sole factor affecting the UVC light absorption of goat milk but might also be affected by the larger fat globules in goat milk . 
Contrarily an increase in milk fat content results in a higher reduced scattering coefficient. 
Although the reduced scattering coefficients of GM and GM. were not significantly  different from the scattering coefficient of CSM the observed higher scattering coefficients of cow milk with increasing fat levels can be explained by the fine size particles observed in cow milk compared to goat milk of similar fat level . These observations are in agreement with Mulder and Walstra  and Walstra et al.  who reported that casein micelles scatter more shortwavelength than longwavelength light due to their fine particle size although both casein micelles and fat globules are responsible to the light scattering incident in milk .  
... The relationship and importance of chemical composition and suspended particle size on the optical properties of the milk 
The colloidal solids in the milk mainly dominated by fat globule and casein micelles absorb and scatter light at various degrees according to their number size and refractive index . Existing literature that observes the correlation between the physicochemical and optical properties of the milk is mainly focused on the visible or nearinfrared  light. Thus there is a lack of information regarding the effect of chemical composition and suspended particleprofiles of milk on the UVC optical properties of milk. With this fact in mind this study conducted the multiple ordinary least squares  regression to estimate the relationship between the milk optical properties  as the dependent variables and the milk chemical composition  and particle size 
 as the independent variables. The standardized regression coefficients were also generated to compare the strength of the effect between independent variables to the dependent variable. Several OLS regression equations with predictor variables that have a significant relationship to the absorption or reduced scattering coefficient are presented in 
Table  and Table  respectively. The normality of the data from these equations was also verified using the ShapiroWilk normality test quantilequantile plot and residual plot .  
The univariate linear regression equations in Table  indicate that milk protein content and particle size parameter D[] which represents the fine particles have a strong relationship with the absorption coefficient with R at around  and  respectively. Adding a predictor of fat content D[] D[ ] or total particle number to the model with protein as the predictor increases the R from  to between  to . These equations indicate that both suspended fat globules and casein micelles particles in milk strongly affect the UVC absorption.  
The negative coefficient on protein and total particle number variables indicates that a higher concentration of fine particles of casein micelles in milk results in a lower UVC absorption. Considering that the fine particles of casein micelles strongly scatter shortwavelength light  the scattering incident by casein micelles may decrease the UVC absorption in milk. The positive coefficient on D[ ] and D[] shows that larger particles of fat globules absorb more UVC light than smaller fat globule particles which is in agreement with previous reports that the large particles of milkfat globule contribute to the incidence of UVC light absorption in milk .  

The equation with protein and fat levels as the predictors signifies that the protein level has a stronger negative relationship to the UVC absorbance than the positive relationship of fat level. However once the particle size parameters were taken into account the fat level turned into having a negative effect on the UVC absorption. A higher concentration of suspended particles in milk might reduce the UVC absorption. The UVC absorption in milk was best described by the fat level and the particle sizes  affecting about  of the variation within the absorption coefficient. Adding a variable to this model did not significantly improve the goodness of fit of the model. 
As a single predictor protein level contributed only around  of the variation within the reduced scattering coefficient . Adding a variable of total particle number D[] D[] or fat increased the R significantly from  to between . The models express a positive correlation between fat or protein level and the reduced scattering coefficient agreeing with Walstra and Jenness  who reported that both casein micelles and fat globules contribute to the light scattering. Combining two independent variables of fat level with D[] or protein level could explain about  of the variation within the reduced scattering coefficient. These equations are considered the best among other possible models since adding more variables reduced the predicted R and improved the R by only about . 
 

If the protein level was taken into account the larger size of suspended particles could increase the UVC scattering in milk. However if the fat level was considered the predictor the UVC scattering will increase as the fine particles increase in concentration or decrease in size. Studies reported that the scattering coefficient is mainly influenced by the size and the concentration of the fat globules  and casein micelles scatter less light than fat globules due to their smaller particle size . However casein micelles scatter more shorterwavelength than longerwavelength light due to their fine size .  
... The effect of milk optical properties on the average UVC fluence rate  in milk 
Table  shows the optical properties of the milk samples and exposure time required to deliver predetermined UVC fluences to the milk samples. The optical properties of milk such as refractive index absorption coefficient and reduced scattering coefficient were taken into account in the calculation of E’avg in the milk samples which later be used to determine the required exposure time for the desired UVC fluence using equation . Considering that most of the absorption and reduced scattering coefficient of the milk samples within various batches were statistically not significant  see Figure BB of Appendix B) the UV experiment on milk was done in triplicates using milk sample from the same lot number. At a similar level of UVC irradiance CSM has the highest E’avg at . followed by CM and CM. at . and . and GM and GM. at . and . respectively. A longer exposure time was required for the liquid with lower E’avg and vice versa. The exposure times were statistically different between milk samples for all UVC fluence . 

Ansari et al.  concluded that the UVC incident irradiance in milk could differ due to the concentration of total solids which affects the UVC absorption coefficient of the milk. Among skim cow milk  whole cow milk  and sheep milk  the highest inactivation of B. subtilis ATCC  spores using a coiled tube UV reactor was achieved in skim cow milk while the lowest inactivation was observed in sheep milk. Our study also demonstrated that milk with a higher absorption coefficient had a lower UVC average fluence rate . However in contrast with the study by Ansari et al.  the total solids of milk did not linearly correlate to its UVC absorption coefficient.  
... The incremental log inactivation of L. monocytogenes cocktail in UVC treated PBS and milk 
Overall the log reductions did not significantly differ between milk samples at all levels of UVC fluence in the experiment . Significantly lower reductions were found only in GM compared to CM when irradiated with  mJ/cm UVC fluence. This difference can be attributed to various factors related to the milk samples which might affect the accuracy of the UVC fluence calculation for the goat milk samples specifically due to the high variance of the optical properties of goat milk. Considering that the goat milk was unhomogenized  optical properties changes in goat milk during storage or a significant difference in optical properties between batches might occur. 
 
 
The UVC fluence of  mJ/cm could inactivate about  logs of L. monocytogenes cocktail in PBS. However the same fluence could only inactivate about  to  logs of the cocktail in milk. Using a similar UV apparatus and fluence calculation method GunterWard et al.  reported that a UVC fluence of . mJ/cm was required to inactivate  logs of L. monocytogenes ATCC in pasteurized skimmed milk using a collimated beam device. Done by the same research group a higher UVC fluence at . mJ/cm was required to achieve log reduction of L. monocytogenes ATCC in pasteurized skimmed milk using a continuous deanflow spiral UV reactor . Matak et al.  reported log reduction of 
L. monocytogenes L in raw goat milk with  M.F. after being irradiated to approximately 
. mJ/cm of UVC fluence using a thinfilm UV apparatus. More than  logs of 
L monocytogenes cocktail in UHT full cream milk were inactivated after being exposed to 
. mJ/cm of UVC fluence inside the coiled tube continuous dean flow UV system . 
By taking the milk optical properties and other correction factors into account in the UVC fluence calculation the log inactivation by the same UVC fluence in all types of liquid should ideally be similar. The data shows that most log reductions in milk samples treated with UVC fluence up to  mJ/cm were not statistically different or higher than the log reduction in PBS . A statistically higher log inactivation in milk than PBS was observed in CSM treated with 
 mJ/cm of UVC fluence and CM treated with  and  mJ/cm of UVC fluence . However a significantly lower log inactivation in milk than in PBS was observed in the GM treated with  and  mJ/cm of UVC fluence and CM and GM. treated with  mJ/cm of UVC fluence. It can be considered from these results that the UVC fluence calculation method implemented in this study could be used to estimate more accurate UVC fluence in a collimated beam device operating at . nm wavelength up to  mJ/cm. However the UVC fluence higher than  mJ/cm was overestimated resulting in a lower log inactivation in milk than in PBS.  
Müller et al.  and Gayán et al.  observed that the most influencing factor on the efficacy of the UVC inactivation was the absorbance of liquid based on the dissolved compounds. However the findings of the present study agreeing with Patras et al.  demonstrated that in addition to the absorption coefficient the reduced scattering coefficient is another crucial factor to take into consideration to determine more accurate UVC fluences required to inactivate pathogens especially in opaque liquids such as milk. However it is essential to point out that in addition to understanding the optical properties of opaque liquids a proper method development is required to incorporate the optical properties in the fluence calculation. UVC fluences Appropriate mathematical algorithms that consider some factors such as microbial resistance and inactivation kinetics treatment temperatures protective effect of the liquid medium and reparability of the microorganisms through photoreactivation or dark repair pathways might be able to determine the UVC fluence accurately .   
... UVC inactivation kinetics modeling of L. monocytogenes cocktail in PBS and milk 
The model analysis results from GInaFiT indicated that it is unlikely to fit loglinear models with tailing to the log inactivation in milk samples because the Nres value which represents the more resistant subpopulation number of cells that cause tailing effect  was lower than the lowest measured number of cells in the experiment. However the log inactivation in PBS was well fitted to the Weibull+tail model. The biphasic models which depicts two homogeneous population groups in the initial population with different linear inactivation rate  were also unlikely for most of the obtained log inactivation data because the parameter estimate of two inactivation rate constants  was equal. Therefore the present study focuses only on the best possible models: the loglinear+shoulder Weibull Weibull+tail and double Weibull models.  
The loglinear model has a lower goodnessoffit to the log inactivation in PBS than the nonloglinear models with an adjusted R of  . Similar to the single strain experiment where the UVC inactivation of the dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains in a clear PBS best fit the Weibull+tail model  the UVC inactivation of the cocktail in PBS also has the best quality of fit with the Weibull+tail model with adjusted R of .. The cocktail inactivation behaviour in PBS best fits three models with similar goodnessoffit: the Weibull Weibull+tail and double Weibull models. The data indicated that the tailing effect of the cocktail inactivation in PBS was less visible compared to the single strain inactivation in PBS . 
The inactivation kinetics of the cocktail in milk has a good fit to the loglinear with adjusted R varies between  and  . GunterWard et al.  and Ward et al.  reported that the UV inactivation of L. monocytogenes ATCC in skim milk irradiated by collimated beam device and Deanflow spiral reactor had a good fit to the loglinear model with R at  and  respectively. However the cocktail inactivation in the milk samples best fit the Weibull and Double Weibull model with adjusted R between  to . The Weibull model depicts a single convex or concave nonloglinear inactivation curve  while the double Weibull model depicts two convex or concave nonloglinear inactivation curves with different degrees of inclination representing two subpopulations with different resistance to the stress factor . Crook et al.  also reported that the Double Weibull model had the best fit among other models in GInaFiT for the inactivation of L. monocytogenes 
ATCC in UHT milk irradiated using a thinfilm turbulent flow UV device. In this study the Weibull model was proposed as the best model to describe the impact of UVC irradiation on the cocktail in the milk because four out of five milk samples have a better fit with the Weibull than the Double Weibull model. Papademas et al.  observed that the Weibull and Double Weibull model provides a good fit for the UV inactivation of L. innocua NCTC in donkey milk. However the biphasic model provides a slightly better fit by  than the Weibull and Double Weibull models. 
The required UVC fluences to achieve incremental log inactivation of the cocktail based on the bestfit Weibull model for PBS and milk samples was presented in Table . About  to  mJ/cm of UVC fluence were required to inactivate a log of the cocktail in all liquid types. 
Greater than  mJ/cm of UVC fluence was required to achieve log reduction of L. monocytogenes in all milk samples except skim milk and to achieve log reduction in skim milk. The gap between the required UVC fluence in PBS and milk samples becomes wider as the desired log inactivation increases. This gap roughly depicts the gap between the calculated and the real UVC fluence exposed to the cocktail in the experiment. 
.. Conclusion and Perspectives 
Suspended fat globules and casein micelles play a critical role in UVC light absorption and scattering in milk. Bigger suspended fat globule particles significantly promote UVC absorption while both large fat globules and fine casein micelles contribute to the UVC scattering in milk. The increase in fat or decrease in protein content significantly increases the UVC absorbance of the milk. However if the particle size parameters were taken into account the fat content negatively affected the UVC absorbance. Higher protein and fat content significantly increase the UVC scattering in milk.  
A modification was made to the IUVApublished UVC fluence calculation method by considering the absorption and reduced scattering coefficient of the sample. This method was used in the average UVC fluence rate calculation for milk samples to deliver     and  mJ/cm of UV radiation to the milk samples. UVC fluence of  mJ/cm could inactivate the dairyassociated L. monocytogenes cocktail as much as   and log cycles in PBS pasteurized cow and goat milk respectively. The UVC fluence calculation method used in this study results in a similar log inactivation in PBS and milk samples up to UVC fluence of  mJ/cm. However a future improvement on the calculation method is needed to accurately calculate higher UVC fluence in an opaque liquid such as milk. The optical properties of the milk are the critical component in the UVC pasteurization which requires a control measure or preprocessing steps to standardize the optical properties prior to the UVC treatment to obtain accurate UVC fluence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER .  LIMITATIONS FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND FINAL CONCLUSIONS 
.. Limitations and Future Directions 
This study was the first to offer a kinetic modelling and UVC fluences required to achieve incremental log inactivation of dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains in PBS and milk by considering factors affecting the UVC propagation in an opaque liquid such as liquid optical properties and other factors as described in Bolton and Linden . However several limitations should be addressed in this study. This study together with other studies  provides a prospect of UVC irradiation being utilized for a pretreatment or a substitution to milk thermal pasteurization. However the milk samples used in this study were already pasteurized or homogenized and pasteurized and have different optical properties compared to raw milk. To better understand the potential of the UVC irradiation to pasteurize milk a similar experiment on raw milk will provide more precise results showing the impact of the UVC irradiation on the pathogen inactivation and indigenous microorganism reduction. Future studies should also evaluate the physicochemical and sensory properties of the UV pasteurized milk. 
Commercial pasteurized cow and goat milk were used in the experiment. The cow milk was mechanically homogenized whereas the goat milk was not mechanically homogenized. The optical properties of the less stable liquid such as unhomogenized goat milk might change during storage. Ideally to minimize the variance of the calculated UVC fluences required in the milk experiment the milk optical properties measurement and the UV experiment should be done using the same batch of milk samples and on the same day. However due to the extensive process of optical properties measurement it is not possible to do both measurements on the same day. This study has not investigated the degree of changes in the optical properties of milk samples within their shelf life. However the optical properties measurement on the same day with the UVC irradiation experiment using raw milk becomes very critical due to the unstable suspended particles in raw milk. 
A longer tailing effect observed in the experiments on  ml PBS compared to  ml PBS and milk samples indicate that there might be a UVC fluence distribution pattern difference between  ml and  ml liquid. Although the mixing speed was similar the mixing in  ml liquid has flatter liquid surface than  ml liquid surface. It indicates that the UVC fluence distribution pattern might vary between liquid volumes. Ideally identical device setups should be used to minimize uncontrolled variables when comparing experiments. However the collimating tube was removed and the liquid volume was reduced to  ml in order to increase the UVC irradiance in the milk experiment. These changes might slightly impact the UV propagation in the experiment on milk samples. Further investigation to find factors affecting the UVC fluence distribution in a PBS may improve the understanding of the UVC irradiation by the collimated beam device.  
Even though the optical properties of the milk samples have been taken into account in the UVC fluence calculation this study clearly showed that the UVC fluence of  mJ/cm could not reach log inactivation in the milk samples. In contrast log cycles of the cocktail can be achieved in UVC treated PBS. Some limitations on the experiment such as not using the ?a and ?'s of the actual milk samples used in the UVC irradiation experiment or the uncontrolled liquid temperature might affect the calculation accuracy of the higher UVC fluence in milk. Although the experiment has been designed to minimize the liquid temperature increase and the mixing time was kept under  minutes the temperature increase of the milk samples in this experiment and its impact on the log reduction of the cocktail in the milk samples is unknown. It is suggested to control the liquid temperature by using a water bath or temperaturecontrolled vessel for future studies to eliminate the influence of the temperature on the UVC inactivation. 
It is essential to learn the sublethal injury and recovery rate of the L. monocytogenes treated by UVC irradiation in milk. The microorganism can repair the damaged DNA through reverse photoreactivation and dark repair pathways . In this study all treated milk samples were directly inoculated to the TSA plates and placed in the dark until the end of incubation time to avoid photoreactivation. However the microorganism can recover the sublethal injury in the dark through reverse damage using Spore photoproducts  lyase or excision repair . The chemical component in milk might provide a protective effect and better recovery to the sublethalinjured cells apart from interfering with the UVC propagation. Further investigation should be done to explain the higher recovery rate of UVC irradiated L. monocytogenes in milk compared to clear PBS. Moreover future investigating the presence of the viable but nonculturable  state in the UVC irradiated L. monocytogenes in milk during preservation is required to better understand the UVC pasteurization on milk. 
UVLEDs are considered superior to low pressure or medium pressure mercury lamp due to their small size longer operational life absence of toxic mercury and glass and ease of emission control . Studies showed a comparable germicidal effect of UVLEDs to LPM UV lamps in clear liquid . Another more recent study showed that the UVLEDs emitting at – nm range had a similar or more effective inactivation of E. coli Salmonella and Listeria in a saline solution than . nm UVC emitted by the LPM lamps at the same UV fluence . Considering the advantage of UVLEDs future studies using UVLEDs collimated beam system with a similar method to the present study may provide meaningful evidence for the future utilization of UVC LEDs as an alternative for liquid nonthermal pasteurization.  
.. 
 
D. Discussion on the effect of liquid volume on the UVC inactivation of L. monocytogenes 
cocktail using a collimated beam device 
The L. monocytogenes cocktail log reductions between  ml and  ml PBS treated with 
UVC fluence of   and  mJ/cm were not significantly different . However the log inactivation in  ml PBS was statistically lower than  ml PBS for treatment at  and  mJ/cm . In addition the cocktail inactivation by UVC irradiation has a sigmoidal pattern in  ml PBS but a convex curve in  ml PBS and milk . The tailing effect in the  ml PBS was not too visible compared to  ml PBS. This evidence indicates that there might be a difference in UVC fluence distribution between  ml and  ml liquid for a specific mixing period.  
The water depth of the liquid has been considered in the fluence calculation as shown in 
Equation . However the UVC fluence calculation protocol by Bolton et al.  assumes that the liquid surface is flat since the UVC incident irradiation occurs only on the liquid surface . In this present study the liquid volume difference affects the UVC fluence distribution due to the difference in the formed liquid vortex. Although the mixing speed was similar the mixing in  ml PBS has a greater vortex than  ml PBS due to the shallowness of the liquid in the beaker which increases the convexity of the liquid surface in  ml PBS. The mixing with a slightly longer magnetic stir bar might also impact the size of the vortex in the milk samples.  
A greater vortex might increase the surface's convexity leading to a lower log inactivation in PBS at a specific mixing time until all parts of the liquid are exposed to the surface. Different mixing patterns could result in slower UVC fluence distribution or increase the existence of cellular aggregates . However the disappearance of the tailing behaviour from the UV inactivation curve in milk samples might be due to the UVC irradiation that has not inactivated the minor subpopulation group with higher 
UVC resistance at higher log inactivation . There is a possibility that the tailing phase appears at a higher fluence of UVC irradiation which is not yet demonstrated in the present study on the milk samples. 

2 

1 

 

6 

7 

 

10 

11 

 

20 

21 

 

26 

27 

 

32 

 

 







34 

35 

 

 

37 

 

38 

 

 

9 
 

9 
 

9 
 

