Final Conclusions 
Overall this study shows a great potential of UVC irradiation to inactivate pathogens specifically L. monocytogenes in opaque liquids such as milk using a collimated beam device. The true UVC fluence required for the incremental log inactivation of dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains in a clear fluid was successfully determined due to the welldefined factors affecting the UVC attenuation in the UVC fluence calculation. This study suggests that the UVC absorbance and scattering of milk mainly correlated to the concentration and particle size of the suspended fat globules and casein micelles in milk. Larger particles of fat globules strongly affect the UVC absorption in milk whose particle size has a stronger correlation than the concentration. In comparison the UVC scattering is affected by suspended fat globules and casein micelles in which the protein slightly contributes more than fat.  
Moreover this study supported the hypothesis that UVC fluence in milk is strongly associated with the optical properties of the milk particularly the UVC absorption and reduced scattering coefficient. This study also suggested that the adaptation of the UVC treatment for commercial application should be implemented on liquid foods with known optical properties. Using the fluence determination protocol by Bolton et al.  and Bolton and Linden  and taking the absorption and reduced scattering coefficient of the milk into account the calculation of UVC fluence to achieve incremental log inactivation could be more accurate. In PBS the UVC fluence of  mJ/cm successfully produced log reduction of dairyassociated L. monocytogenes strains. However the UVC fluence calculation method in the milk needs to be refined as the inactivation of L. monocytogenes cocktail in the milk becomes lower than the inactivation in PBS solution along with the increasing UVC fluence. 
Nonloglinear inactivation behaviours of L. monocytogenes under UVC irradiation in transparent and opaque liquid were observed in this study. The UVC inactivation of all 
L. monocytogenes strains and the cocktail in  ml PBS were best fitted to the Weibull+tail model. The UVC inactivation of the L. monocytogenes cocktails in  ml PBS and milk samples were best fitted to the Weibull model. There was clear evidence that the volume difference of the treated samples affects the distribution of the UVC fluence in the liquid  which further affects the achieved log inactivation. The calculated UVC fluences required to achieve incremental log inactivation of L. monocytogenes strains or cocktails in the PBS or milk samples based on the selected inactivation kinetic models are also presented in this study.  
A followup study on the chemical and sensory evaluation of the UVCtreated milk should be performed to present the potential of the UVC irradiation for dairy processing. As mentioned in section . some improvements to the experimental methods may increase the accuracy and reduce the variability of the collected data. Altogether further research using a widelyrecognized UVC fluence calculation method could significantly contribute to the development of nonthermal UV pasteurization for opaque liquid foods whether as an alternative to conventional thermal pasteurization or as part of a hurdle technology. 

